A Survey of Predictive Modelling under Imbalanced
Distributions
Paula Branco1,2, Lu s Torgo1,2, and Rita P. Ribeiro1,2
1LIAAD - INESC TEC
2DCC - Faculdade de Ci^ encias - Universidade do Porto
paobranco@gmail.com, ltorgo@dcc.fc.up.pt, rpribeiro@dcc.fc.up.pt
May 14, 2015
Abstract
Many real world data mining applications involve obtaining predic-
tive models using data sets with strongly imbalanced distributions of
the target variable. Frequently, the least common values of this tar-
get variable are associated with events that are highly relevant for end
users (e.g. fraud detection, unusual returns on stock markets, antici-
pation of catastrophes, etc.). Moreover, the events may have dierent
costs and benets, which when associated with the rarity of some of
them on the available training data creates serious problems to pre-
dictive modelling techniques. This paper presents a survey of existing
techniques for handling these important applications of predictive ana-
lytics. Although most of the existing work addresses classication tasks
(nominal target variables), we also describe methods designed to han-
dle similar problems within regression tasks (numeric target variables).
In this survey we discuss the main challenges raised by imbalanced dis-
tributions, describe the main approaches to these problems, propose a
taxonomy of these methods and refer to some related problems within
predictive modelling.
1 Introduction
Predictive modelling is a data analysis task whose goal is to build a model
of an unknown function Y=f(X1;X2;;Xp), based on a training sample
fhxi;yiign
i=1with examples of this function. Depending on the type of the
variableY, we face either a classication task (nominal Y) or a regression
task (numeric Y). Models are obtained through an optimisation process that
tries to nd the "optimal" model parameters according to some criterion.
The most frequent criteria are the error rate for classication and the mean
squared error for regression. For some real world applications it is of key
1arXiv:1505.01658v2  [cs.LG]  13 May 2015
importance that the obtained models are particularly accurate at some sub-
range of the domain of the target variable. Examples include diagnostic of
rare diseases, forecasting rare extreme returns on nancial markets, among
many others. Frequently, these specic sub-ranges of the target variable are
poorly represented on the available training sample. In these cases we face
what is usually known as a problem of imbalanced data distributions, or
imbalanced data sets. In other words, in these domains the cases that are
more important for the user are rare and few exist on the available training
set. The conjugation of the specic preferences of the user with the poor
representation of these situations creates problems to modelling approaches
at several levels. Namely, we typically need (i) special purpose evaluation
metrics that are biased towards the performance of the models on these rare
cases, and moreover, we need means for (ii) making the learning algorithms
focus on these rare events. Without addressing these two questions, models
will tend to be biased to the most frequent (and uninteresting for the user)
cases, and the results of the "standard" evaluation metrics will not capture
the competence of the models on these rare cases.
In this paper we provide a general denition for the problem of imbal-
anced domains that is suitable for both classication and regression tasks.
We present an extensive survey of existing performance assessment measures
and approaches to the problem of imbalanced data distributions. Existing
surveys address only the problem of imbalanced domains for classication
tasks (e.g. Kotsiantis et al. (2006); He and Garcia (2009); Sun et al. (2009)).
Therefore, the coverage of performance assessment measures and approaches
to tackle both classication and regression tasks is an innovative aspect of
our paper. Another key feature of our work is the proposal of a broader tax-
onomy of methods for handling imbalanced domains. Our proposal extends
previous taxonomies by including post-processing strategies.
The main contributions of this work are: i) provide a general denition of
the problem of imbalanced domains suitable for classication and regression
tasks; ii) review the main performance assessment measures for classication
and regression tasks under imbalanced domains; iii) provide a taxonomy
of existing approaches to tackle the problem of imbalanced domains both
for classication and regression tasks; and iv) describe the most important
techniques to address this problem.
The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 denes the problem of
imbalanced data distributions and the type of existing approaches to address
this problem. Section 3 describes several evaluation metrics that are biased
towards performance assessment on the relevant cases in these domains.
Section 4 provides a taxonomy of the modelling approaches to imbalanced
domains, describing some of the most important techniques in each category.
Finally, Section 5 explores some problems related with imbalanced domains
and Section 6 concludes the paper.
2
2 Problem Denition
As we have mentioned before the problem of imbalanced data distributions
occurs in the context of predictive tasks where the goal is to obtain a good
approximation of the unknown function Y=f(X1;X2;;Xp) that maps
the values of a set of ppredictor variables into the values of a target variable.
These approximations to the function are obtained using a training data set
D=fhxi;yiign
i=1. At the center of the problem of imbalanced distribution
is the fact that the user assigns more importance to the performance of
the obtained approximation on a subset of the range of values of the target
variableY. Let us express this user preference bias by an importance or
relevance function () that maps the values of the target variable into a range
of importance, where 1 is maximal importance and 0 minimum relevance,
(Y) :Y! [0;1] (1)
whereYis the domain of the target variable Y.
Suppose the user denes a relevance threshold tRwhich sets the bound-
ary above which the target variable values are relevant for the user. Let
DR2Dbe the subset of the training samples for which the relevance of the
target value is high (or above tR), i.e.DR=fhxi;yii 2D:(yi)> tRg,
andDN2Dbe the subset of the training sample with the normal (or less
important) cases, i.e DN=fhxi;yii 2D:(yi)tRg=DnDR.
The problem of imbalanced data sets can be described by the following
assertions:
(Y) is not uniform across the domain of Y
The cardinality of the set of examples DRis much smaller than the
cardinality of DN
Standard evaluation criteria for both learning the models and evaluat-
ing their performance assume an uniform (Y), i.e. they are insensitive
to(Y).
In this context, we potentially have a situation where the obtained mod-
els are sub-optimal with respect to the user-preference biases, and moreover,
the metrics used to evaluate them are not in accordance with these biases
and thus may be misleading.
Regarding the evaluation issue, traditional metrics are not adequate as
they do not take into account the user preferences. Several solutions have
been proposed to address this problem and overcome existing diculties,
mainly for classication tasks.
With respect to the inadequacy of the obtained models a large number of
solutions has also appeared in the literature. We propose a categorisation of
these approaches that considers three types of strategies: (i) modications
3
on the learning algorithms, (ii) changes on the data before the the learning
process takes place and nally (iii) transformations applied to the predictions
of the learned models.
3 Performance Metrics for Imbalanced Domains
Obtaining a model from data can be seen as a search problem guided by
an evaluation criterion that establishes a preference ordering among dier-
ent alternatives. The main problem of imbalanced data sets lies on the
fact that they are often associated with an user preference bias towards the
performance on cases that are poorly represented in the available data sam-
ple. Standard evaluation criteria tend to focus the evaluation of the models
on the most frequent cases, which is against the user preferences on these
tasks. In fact, the use of common metrics in imbalanced domains can lead to
sub-optimal classication models (He and Garcia, 2009; Weiss, 2004; Kubat
and Matwin, 1997) and might produce misleading conclusions since these
measures are insensitive to skewed domains (Ranawana and Palade, 2006;
Daskalaki et al., 2006). As such, selecting proper evaluation metrics plays a
key role in the task of correctly handling data imbalance. Adequate metrics
should not only provide means to compare the models according to the user
preferences, but can also be used to drive the learning of these models.
As the problem of imbalanced domains has been addressed mainly in
classication problems, there are far more solutions for this type of tasks.
We start by addressing the problem of evaluation metrics in classication
and then move to regression.
Table 1 summarises the main references concerning performance assess-
ment proposals for imbalanced domains in classication and regression.
Task type (Section) Main References
Classication
(3.1)Estabrooks and Japkowicz (2001); Kubat et al. (1998); Bradley (1997)
Provost et al. (1998); Davis and Goadrich (2006)
Garc a et al. (2008, 2009, 2010); Ranawana and Palade (2006)
Batuwita and Palade (2009, 2012); Hand (2009); Thai-Nghe et al. (2011)
Regression
(3.2)Zellner (1986); Cain and Janssen (1995); Christoersen and Diebold (1997)
Crone et al. (2005); Lee (2008); Hern andez-Orallo (2013)
Bi and Bennett (2003); Torgo (2005); Torgo and Ribeiro (2007, 2009)
Ribeiro (2011)
Table 1: Metrics for classication and regression, corresponding sections and
main bibliographic references
3.1 Metrics for Classication Tasks
The confusion matrix for a two-class problem presents the results obtained
by a given classier (cf. Table 2). This table provides for each class the in-
4
Predicted
Positive Negative
TruePositive TP FN
Negative FP TN
Table 2: Confusion matrix for a two-class problem.
stances that were correctly classied, i.e. the number of True Positives (TP)
and True Negatives (TN), and the instances that were wrongly classied,
i.e. the number of False Positives (FP) and False Negatives (FN).
Accuracy (cf. Equation 2) and its complement error rate are the most
frequently used metrics for estimating the performance of learning systems
in classication problems. For two-class problems, accuracy can be dened
as follows,
accuracy =TP+TN
TP+FN+TN+FP(2)
Considering a user preference bias towards the minority (positive) class
examples, accuracy is not suitable because the impact of the least repre-
sented, but more important examples, is reduced when compared to that of
the majority class. For instance, if we consider a problem where only 1%
of the examples belong to the minority class, an high accuracy of 99% is
achievable by predicting the majority class for all examples. Yet, all mi-
nority class examples, the rare and more interesting cases for the user, are
misclassied. This is worthless when the goal is the identication of the rare
cases.
The metrics used in imbalanced domains must consider the user prefer-
ences and, thus, should take into account the data distribution. To fulll
this goal several performance measures were proposed. From Table 2 the
following measures (cf. Equations 3-8) can be obtained,
true positive rate (recall or sensitivity ) :TPrate=TP
TP+FN(3)
true negative rate (specificity ) :TNrate=TN
TN+FP(4)
false positive rate :FPrate=FP
TN+FP(5)
false negative rate :FNrate=FN
TP+FN(6)
positive predictive value (precision ) :PPvalue =TP
TP+FP(7)
5
negative predictive value :NPvalue =TN
TN+FN(8)
However, as some of these measures exhibit a trade-o and it is imprac-
tical to simultaneously monitor several measures, new metrics have been
developed, such as the F-measure (Rijsbergen, 1979),the geometric mean
(Kubat et al., 1998) or the receiver operating characteristic (ROC ) curve
(Egan, 1975).
The F-Measure (F), a combination of both precision and recall , is de-
ned as follows:
F=(1 +)2recallprecision
2recall +precision(9)
whereis a coecient to adjust the relative importance of recall with
respect to precision (if= 1 precision and recall have the same weight,
large values of will increase the weight of recall whilst values less than 1
will give more importance to precision ).
Fis commonly used and is more informative about the eectiveness of
a classier on predicting correctly the cases that matter to the user (e.g.
Estabrooks and Japkowicz (2001)). This metric value is high when both
recall (a measure of completeness) and precision (a measure of exactness)
are high.
An also frequently used metric when dealing with imbalanced data sets
is the geometric mean (G-Mean ) which is dened as:
G Mean =r
TP
TP+FNTN
TN+FP=p
sensitivityspecificity
(10)
G-Mean is an interesting measure because it computes the geometric
mean of the accuracies of the two classes, attempting to maximise them
while obtaining good balance.
Two popular tools used in imbalanced domains are the receiver operat-
ing characteristics (ROC ) curve (cf. Figure 1) and the corresponding area
under the ROC curve ( AUC ) (Metz, 1978) . Provost et al. (1998) proposed
ROC and AUC as alternatives to accuracy . The ROC curve allows the
visualisation of the relative trade-o between benets ( TPrate) and costs
(FPrate). The performance of a classier for a certain distribution is repre-
sented by a single point in the ROC space. A ROC curve consists of several
points each one corresponding to a dierent value of a decision/threshold
parameter used for classifying an example as belonging to the positive class.
However, comparing several models through ROC curves is not an easy
task unless one of the curves dominates all the others (Provost and Fawcett,
1997). Moreover, ROC curves do not provide a single-value performance
score which motivates the use of AUC . The AUC (cf. Equation 11) allows
6
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.00.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
False Positive RateTrue Positive Raterandom classifierAB
Ideal ModelFigure 1: ROC curve of three classiers: A, B and random.
the evaluation of the best model on average. Still, it is not biased towards
the minority class.
AUC =1 +TPrate FPrate
2=TPrate+TNrate
2(11)
Precision-recall curves (PR curves ) are recommended for highly skewed
domains where ROC curves may provide an excessively optimistic view of
the performance (Davis and Goadrich, 2006). PR curves have the recall and
precision rates represented on the axes. A strong relation between PRand
ROC curves was found by Davis and Goadrich (2006).
Several other measures were proposed for dealing with some particular
disadvantages of the previously mentioned metrics. For instance, a met-
ric called dominance (Garc a et al., 2008) (cf. Equation 12) was proposed
to deal with the inability of AUC and G-Mean to explain how each class
contributes to the overall performance.
dominance =TPrate TNrate (12)
This measure ranges from  1 to +1.A value of +1 represents situations
where perfect accuracy is achieved on the minority (positive) class, but all
cases of the majority class are missed. A value of  1 corresponds to the
opposite situation.
7
Another example is the index of balanced accuracy (IBA) (Garc a et al.,
2009, 2010) (cf. Equation 13) which quanties a trade-o between an index
of how balanced both class accuracies are and a chosen unbiased measure of
overall accuracy .
IBA(M) = (1 +dominance )M (13)
where (1 + dominance ) is the weighting factor and Mrepresents any
performance metric.
Several other metrics exist such as optimized precision (Ranawana and
Palade, 2006), adjusted geometric mean (Batuwita and Palade, 2009, 2012),
H-measure (Hand, 2009) or B42 (Thai-Nghe et al., 2011). All of them
try to overcome some specic disadvantage detected in another metric when
addressingthe challenge of assessing the performance in imbalanced domains.
3.2 Metrics for Regression Tasks
Very few eorts have been made regarding evaluation metrics for regression
tasks in imbalanced domains. Performance measures commonly used in re-
gression, such as Mean Squared Error (MSE) and Mean Absolute Deviation
(MAD) (cf. Equations 14 and 15) are not adequate to these specic prob-
lems. These measures assume an uniform relevance of the target variable
domain and evaluate only the magnitude of the error.
MSE =1
nnX
i=1(yi ^yi)2(14)
MAD =1
nnX
i=1jyi ^yij (15)
Although the magnitude of the numeric error is important, for tasks
with imbalanced distribution of the target variable, the metric must also be
sensitive to the errors location within the target variable domain, because
as in classication tasks, users of these domains are frequently biased to the
performance on poorly represented values of the target. A simple solution,
such as the introduction of weights, would not full this goal because it would
neglect the errors of predicting a rare value when it is a normal one (Ribeiro,
2011).
Within nance several attempts have been made for considering dif-
ferentiated prediction costs through the proposal of asymmetric loss func-
tions (Zellner, 1986; Cain and Janssen, 1995; Christoersen and Diebold,
1996, 1997; Crone et al., 2005; Granger, 1999; Lee, 2008). However, the pro-
posed solutions, such as LIN-LIN orQUAD-EXP error metrics, all suer
from the same problem: they can only distinguish between over- and under-
predictions. Therefore, they are still unsuitable for addressing the problem
8
of imbalanced domains with a user preference bias towards some specic
ranges of values.
Following the eorts made within classication, some attempts were
made to adapt the existing notion of ROC curves to regression tasks. One of
these attempts is the ROC space for regression (RROC space) (Hern andez-
Orallo, 2013) which is motivated by the asymmetric loss often present on
regression applications where both over-estimations and under-estimations
entail dierent costs. RROC space is dened by plotting the total over-
estimation and under-estimation on the x-axis andy-axis, respectively (cf.
Figure 2). RROC curves are obtained when the notion of shift is used, which
allows to adjust the model to an asymmetric operating condition by adding
or subtracting a constant to the predictions. The notion of dominance can
also be assessed by plotting the curves of dierent regression models, sim-
ilarly to ROC curves in classication problems. Other evaluation metrics
0 5 10 15 20−20 −15 −10 −5 0
OVERUNDER
model A
model B
model C
Figure 2: RROC curve of three models: A, B and C.
were explored, such as the Area Over the RROC curve (AOC ) which was
shown to be equivalent to the error variance. In spite of the importance of
this approach, it still only distinguishes over from under predictions.
Another relevant eort towards the adaptation of the concept of ROC
curves to regression tasks was made by Bi and Bennett (2003) with the
proposal of Regression Error Characteristic (REC ) curves that provide a
graphical representation of the cumulative distribution function (cdf) of the
9
error of a model. These curves plot the error tolerance and the accuracy of
a regression function which is dened as the percentage of points predicted
within a given tolerance .REC curves illustrate the predictive performance
of a model across the range of possible errors (cf. Figure 3). The Area Over
the Curve (AOC ) can also be evaluated and is a biased estimate of the
expected error of a model (Bi and Bennett, 2003). REC curves, although
interesting, are still not sensitive to the error location across the target
variable domain.
0 2 4 6 8 100.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Absolute deviation toleranceAccuracy
model A
model B
model C
Figure 3: REC curve of three models: A, B and C.
To address this problem Regression Error Characteristic Surfaces (RECS )
(Torgo, 2005) were proposed. These surfaces incorporate an additional di-
mension into REC curves representing the cumulative distribution of the
target variable. RECS show how the errors corresponding to a certain point
of the REC curve are distributed across the range of the target variable (cf.
Figure 4). This tool allows the study of the behaviour of alternative models
for certain specic values of the target variable. By zooming on specic
regions of REC surfaces we can carry out two types of analysis that are
highly relevant for some application domains. The rst involves checking
how certain values of prediction error are distributed across the domain of
the target variable, which tells us where this type of errors are more fre-
quent. The second type of analysis involves inspecting the type of errors
a model has on a certain range of the target variable that is of particular
10
interest to us.
Y range
1020304050Error
0.20.40.60.8Probability
0.20.40.60.8
Figure 4: An example of the REC surface.
Another existing approach is the precision/recall evaluation framework,
based on the concept of utility-based regression (Ribeiro, 2011; Torgo and
Ribeiro, 2007). Utility-based regression establishes the notion of relevance of
the target variable values and the existence of a non uniform relevance across
the domain of this variable. In this context, the usefulness of a prediction
dependes on both the numeric error of the prediction (which is provided
by a certain loss function L(^y;y)) and the relevance (importance) of the
predicted ^yand trueyvalues. The relevance function, (), is a continuous
function as dened in Equation 1 which expresses the importance of the
target variable values. Considering the goal of being accurate at rare extreme
values, Ribeiro (2011) describes some methods for automatically obtaining
these functions. The methods are based on the simple observation that, in
these cases, the notion of relevance is inversely proportional to the target
variable probability. Figure 5 shows an example of the relevance function 
in a data set where the high extreme values of the target variable are the
most important, and Figure 6 shows the corresponding utility surface .
Using this utility-based framework, the notions of precision and recall
were adapted to regression problems with non-uniform relevance of the tar-
get values by Torgo and Ribeiro (2009) and Ribeiro (2011). Ribeiro (2011)
denes the notion of event using the concept of utility. In this context, the
ratios of the two metrics are also dened as functions of utility, nally lead-
11
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0φ(Y)
Y 0% 59%Figure 5: Relevance function auto-
matically generated
020406080
020406080-1.0-0.50.00.51.0Uφ1  Utility Surface
Y
Y^Uφp (Y^ , Y)
-1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0Figure 6: Utility surface obtained
with relevance function () shown in
Figure 5
ing to denitions of precision andrecall for regression1. The notion of utility
led to the proposal of other measures, such as the Mean Utility and Nor-
malized Mean Utility (Ribeiro, 2011). These metrics are derived from the
utility and enable the comparison of dierent regression models according
to the user preference bias.
4 Modelling Strategies for Handling Imbalanced
Domains
Imbalanced domains raise signicant challenges when building predictive
models. The scarce representation of the most important cases leads to
models that tend to be more focused on the normal examples, neglecting the
rare events. Several strategies have been developed to address this problem,
mainly in a classication setting. We propose that the existing approaches to
learn under imbalanced data distributions can be grouped into the following
four main categories:
Data Pre-processing;
Special-purpose Learning Methods;
Prediction Post-processing;
Hybrid Methods.
1Full details can be obtained in Chapter 4 of Ribeiro (2011).
12
Data Pre-processing approaches include solutions that pre-process the
given imbalanced data set, changing the data distribution to make standard
algorithms focus on the cases that are more relevant for the user. These
methods have the following advantages: (i) can be applied to any existing
learning tool; and (ii) the chosen models are biased to the goals of the
user (because the data distribution was previously changed to match these
goals), and thus it is expected that the models are more interpretable in
terms of these goals. The main inconvenient of this strategy is that it may
be dicult to relate the modications in the data distribution with the
target loss function.This means that mapping the given data distribution
into an optimal new distribution according to the user goals is not easy.
Special-purpose learning methods comprise solutions that change the
existing algorithms to be able to learn from imbalanced data. The following
are important advantages: (i) the user goals are incorporated directly into
the models; and (ii) it is expected that the models obtained this way are more
comprehensible to the user. The main disadvantages of these approaches
are: (i) the user is restricted in his choice to the learning algorithms that
have been modied to be able to optimise his goals, or has to develop new
algorithms for the task; (ii) if the target loss function changes, the model
must be relearned, and moreover, it may be necessary to introduce further
modications in the algorithm which may not be straightforward; and (iii)
it requires a deep knowledge of the learning algorithms implementations.
Prediction Post-processing approaches use the original data set and a
standard learning algorithm, only manipulating the predictions of the mod-
els according to the user preferences and the imbalance of the data. As
advantages, we can enumerate that: (i) it is not necessary to be aware of
the user preference biases at learning time; (ii) the obtained model can, in
the future, be applied to dierent deployment scenarios (i.e. dierent loss
functions), without the need of re-learning the models or even keeping the
training data available; and (iii) any standard learning tool can be used.
However, these methods also have some drawbacks: (i) the models do not
reect the user preferences; (ii) the models interpretability is meaningless
as they were obtained optimising a loss function that is not in accordance
with the user preference bias.
Approaches following these three types of strategies will be reviewed
in Sections 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3, and will include solutions for both classica-
tion and regression tasks. In Section 4.4 hybrid solutions will be addressed.
Hybrid methods combine approaches of dierent types trying to take advan-
tage of their best characteristics. Figure 7 synthesizes the dierent existing
approaches within each of the categories.
13
Modelling Strategies for
Imbalanced Domains
Data
Pre-processingSpecial-purpose
Learning MethodsPrediction
Post-processingHybrid
Methods
Re-sampling
Active Learning
Weighting the
Data SpaceThreshold Method
Cost-sensitive
Post-processingRe-sampling +
Special-purpose
Learning Methods
Figure 7: Main modelling strategies for imbalanced domains.
4.1 Data Pre-processing
Pre-processing strategies consist of methods of using the available data set
in a way that is more in accordance with the user preference biases. This
means that instead of applying a learning algorithm directly to the provided
training data, we will rst somehow pre-process this data according to the
goals of the user. Any standard learning algorithm can be applied to the
pre-processed data set.
Existing data pre-processing approaches can be grouped into three main
types:
re-sampling: change the data distribution of the data set forcing the
learner to focus on the least represented examples;
active learning: actively selecting the best (more valuable) samples
to learn, leaving the ones with less information to improve the learner
performance;
weighting the data space: modify the training set distribution
using information concerning misclassication costs, such that the
learned model avoids costly errors.
Table 3 summarizes the main bibliographic references for data pre-processing
strategies.
4.1.1 Re-sampling
Applying re-sampling strategies to obtain a more balanced data distribution
is an eective solution to the imbalance problem (Estabrooks et al., 2004;
Batuwita and Palade, 2010a; Fern andez et al., 2008, 2010).
14
Strategy type (Section) Main References
Re-sampling
(4.1.1)Random Under/Over-samplingChawla et al. (2002); Drummond and Holte (2003)
Estabrooks et al. (2004); Seiert et al. (2010);
Chen et al. (2004); Wang and Yao (2009);
Chang et al. (2003); Tao et al. (2006);
Torgo et al. (2013)
Distance Based Chyi (2003); Mani and Zhang (2003)
Data Cleaning BasedKubat and Matwin (1997); Laurikkala (2001);
Batista et al. (2004); Naganjaneyulu and Kuppa (2013)
Recognition BasedChawla et al. (2004); Zhuang and Dai (2006b);
Raskutti and Kowalczyk (2004);
Japkowicz (2000); Bellinger et al. (2012);
Lee and Cho (2006); Zhuang and Dai (2006a)
Cluster BasedJo and Japkowicz (2004); Yen and Lee (2006, 2009);
Cohen et al. (2006)
Synthesising New DataLee (1999, 2000); Chawla et al. (2002); Liu et al. (2007);
Menardi and Torelli (2010); Chawla et al. (2003);
Mart nez-Garc a et al. (2012); Wang and Yao (2009);
Torgo et al. (2013)
Adaptive Synthetic SamplingBatista et al. (2004); Verbiest et al. (2012);
Hu et al. (2009); Zhang et al. (2011);
Barua et al. (2012); Ramentol et al. (2012b,a);
Bunkhumpornpat et al. (2012); Nakamura et al. (2013);
Bunkhumpornpat et al. (2009); Han et al. (2005);
He et al. (2008); Maciejewski and Stefanowski (2011)
Evolutionary SamplingGarc a et al. (2006a); Doucette and Heywood (2008);
Garc a and Herrera (2009); Drown et al. (2009);
Del Castillo and Serrano (2004); Yong (2012);
Maheshwari et al. (2011); Garc a et al. (2012);
Galar et al. (2013)
Re-sampling CombinationsStefanowski and Wilk (2008); Napiera la et al. (2010);
Songwattanasiri and Sinapiromsaran (2010);
Yang and Gao (2012); Li et al. (2008);
Vasu and Ravi (2011); Bunkhumpornpat et al. (2011);
Jeatrakul et al. (2010); Liu et al. (2006);
Mease et al. (2007); Chen et al. (2010)
Active Learning
(4.1.2)Ertekin et al. (2007b,a); Zhu and Hovy (2007)
Ertekin (2013); Mi (2013)
Weighting the Data Space
(4.1.3)Zadrozny et al. (2003); Wang and Japkowicz (2010)
Table 3: Pre-processing strategy types, corresponding sections and main
bibliographic references
15
However, changing the data distribution may not be as easy as expected.
Decide what is the optimal distribution is not straightforward as it is a do-
main dependent decision. Moreover, it was proved for classication tasks
that a perfectly balanced distribution does not always provide optimal re-
sults (Weiss and Provost, 2003). In this context, some solutions were pro-
posed to nd the right amount of re-sampling for a data set (Weiss and
Provost, 2003; Chawla et al., 2005, 2008).
For classication problems, changing the class distribution of the training
data improves classiers performance on an imbalanced context because it
imposes non-uniform misclassication costs. This equivalence between the
two concepts of altering the data distribution and the misclassication cost
ratio is well-known and was rst pointed out by Breiman et al. (1984).
The existing re-sampling strategies are based on a diverse set of tech-
niques such as: random under/over-sampling, distance methods, data clean-
ing approaches, clustering algorithms, synthesising new data or evolutionary
algorithms. We now briey describe the most signicant re-sampling strate-
gies.
Two of the most simple re-sampling approaches that can be applied are
under- and over-sampling. The rst one removes data from the original
data set reducing the sample size, while the second one adds data increasing
the sample size. In random under-sampling, a random set of majority class
examples are discarded. This may eliminate useful examples leading to a
worse performance. Oppositely, in random over-sampling, a random set of
copies of minority class examples is added to the data. This may increase
the likelihood of overtting, specially for higher over-sampling rates (Chawla
et al., 2002; Drummond and Holte, 2003). Moreover, it may decrease the
classier performance and increase the computational eort.
Random under-sampling was also used in the context of ensembles.
Namely, it was combined with boosting (Seiert et al., 2010), bagging (Wang
and Yao, 2009; Chang et al., 2003; Tao et al., 2006) and was applied to
both classes in random forests in a method named Balanced Random Forest
(BRF) (Chen et al., 2004).
For regression tasks, Torgo et al. (2013) perform random under-sampling
of the common values as a strategy for addressing the imbalance problem.
This method uses a relevance function and an user dened threshold to
determine which are the common and uninteresting values that should be
under-sampled.
Despite the potential of randomly selecting examples, under- and over-
sampling strategies can also be carried out by other, more informed, meth-
ods. For instance, under-sampling can be accomplished resorting to distance
evaluations (Chyi, 2003; Mani and Zhang, 2003). These approaches perform
under-sampling based on a certain distance criteria that determines which
are the examples from the majority class to include in the training set. These
strategies are very time consuming which is a major disadvantage, specially
16
when dealing with large data sets.
Under-sampling can also be achieved through data cleaning methods.
The main goal of these methods is to identify possibly noisy examples or
overlapping regions and then decide on the removal of examples. One of
those methods uses Tomek links (Tomek, 1976) which consist of points that
are each other's closest neighbours, but do not share the same class label.
This method allows for two options: only remove Tomek links examples
belonging to the majority class or eliminate Tomek links examples of both
classes (Batista et al., 2004). The notion of Condensed Nearest Neighbour
Rule (CNN) (Hart, 1968) was also applied to perform under-sampling (Ku-
bat and Matwin, 1997). CNN is used to nd a subset of examples consistent
with the training set, i.e., a subset that correctly classies the training exam-
ples using a 1-nearest neighbour classier. CNN and Tomek links methods
were combined in this order by Kubat and Matwin (1997) in a strategy
called One-Sided-Selection (OSS), and in the reverse order in a proposal of
Batista et al. (2004).
Recognition-based methods as one-class learning or autoencoders oer
the possibility to perform the most extreme type of under-sampling where
all the examples from the majority class are removed. In this type of ap-
proach, and contrary to discrimination-based inductive learning, the model
is learned using only examples of the target class, and no counter exam-
ples are included. This lack of examples from the other class(es) is the key
distinguishing feature between recognition-based and discrimination-based
learning.
One-class learning tries to set up boundaries which surround the target
concept. This method starts by measuring the similarity between the target
class and an object. Classication is then performed using a threshold on the
obtained similarity score. One-class learning methods have the disadvantage
of requiring the tuning of the threshold imposed on the similarity. In fact,
this is a sensitive issue because if we choose a too narrow threshold the
minority class examples are disregarded. However, too wide thresholds may
lead to including examples from the majority class. Therefore, establishing
an ecient threshold is vital with this method. Also, some learners actually
need examples from more than one class and are unable to adapt to this
method. Despite all these possible disadvantages, recognition-based learning
algorithms have been proved to provide good prediction performance in
most domains. Developments made in this context include one-class SVMs
(e.g. Sch olkopf et al. (2001); Manevitz and Yousef (2002); Raskutti and
Kowalczyk (2004); Zhuang and Dai (2006b,a); Lee and Cho (2006)) and
the use of an autoencoder (or autoassociator) (e.g. Japkowicz et al. (1995);
Japkowicz (2000)).
Bellinger et al. (2012) investigated the performance variations of binary
and one-class classiers for dierent levels of imbalance. The results on
both articial and real world data sets showed that as the level of imbal-
17
ance increased, the performance of binary classiers decreased, whereas the
performance of one-class classiers stayed relatively stable.
Imbalanced domains can inuence the performance and the eciency
of clustering algorithms (Xuan et al., 2013). However, due to their exibil-
ity, several approaches appeared for dealing with imbalanced data sets using
clustering methods . For instance, the cluster-based oversampling (CBO) al-
gorithm proposed by Jo and Japkowicz (2004) addresses both the imbalance
problem and the problem of small disjuncts. Small disjuncts are subclusters
of a certain class which have a low coverage, i.e., classify only few exam-
ples (Holte et al., 1989). CBO consists of clustering the training data of each
class separately with the k-means technique and then performing random
over-sampling in each cluster. All majority class clusters are over-sampled
until they reach the cardinality of the largest cluster of this class. Then
the minority class clusters are over-sampled until both classes are balanced
maintaining all minority class subclusters with the same number of exam-
ples. Several other proposals based on clustering techniques exist (e.g. Yen
and Lee (2006, 2009); Cohen et al. (2006)).
Another important approach for dealing with the imbalance problem as
a pre-processing step, is the generation of new synthetic data. Several meth-
ods exist for building new synthetic examples. Most of the proposals are
focused on classication tasks. Synthesising new data has several known
advantages (Chawla et al., 2002; Menardi and Torelli, 2010), namely: (i)
reduces the risk of overtting which is introduced when replicas of the ex-
amples are inserted in the training set; (ii) improves the ability of generali-
sation which was compromised by the over-sampling methods. The methods
for synthesising new data can be organized in two groups: (i) one that uses
interpolation of existing examples, and (ii) another that introduces pertur-
bations.
A famous method that uses interpolation is the synthetic minority over-
sampling technique - SMOTE (Chawla et al., 2002). SMOTE algorithm
over-samples the minority class by generating new synthetic data. This
technique is then combined with a certain percentage of random under-
sampling of the majority class that depends on a user dened parameter.
Articial data is created using an interpolation strategy that introduces a
new example along the line segment joining a seed example and one of its k
minority class nearest neighbours. The number of minority class neighbours
(k) is another user dened parameter. For each minority class example a
certain number of examples is generated according to a predened over-
sampling percentage.
SMOTE algorithm has been applied with several dierent classiers and
was also integrated with boosting (Chawla et al., 2003) and bagging (Wang
and Yao, 2009).
SMOTE generates synthetic examples with the positive class label dis-
regarding the negative class examples which may lead to overgeneraliza-
18
tion (Yen and Lee, 2006; Maciejewski and Stefanowski, 2011; Yen and Lee,
2009). This strategy may be specially problematic in the case of highly
skewed class distributions where the minority class examples are very sparse,
thus resulting in a greater chance of class mixture.
The group of techniques that introduces perturbations for generating
new data does not suer from this problem. Lee (1999) proposed an over-
sampling method that produces noisy replicates of the rare cases while keep-
ing the majority class unchanged. The synthetic examples are generated by
adding normally distributed noise to the minority class examples. This sim-
ple strategy was tested with success, and a new version was developed by
Lee (2000). This new approach generates, for a given data set, multiple ver-
sions of training sets with added noise. Then, an average of multiple model
estimates is obtained.
Another framework, named ROSE (Random Over Sampling Examples),
for dealing with the problem of imbalanced classication was presented by
Menardi and Torelli (2010) based on a smoothed bootstrap re-sampling tech-
nique. ROSE generates a more balanced and completely new data set from
the given training set combining over- and under-sampling. One observa-
tion is draw from the training set by giving the same probability to both
existing classes. A new example is generated in the neighbourhood of this
observation, using a width for the neighbourhood determined by a chosen
smoothing matrix.
Several other proposals exist for classication tasks (e.g. Liu et al.
(2007); Mart nez-Garc a et al. (2012)). However, for regression problems
only one method for generating new synthetic data was proposed. Torgo
et al. (2013) have adapted the SMOTE algorithm to regression tasks. Three
key components of the SMOTE algorithm required adaptation for regres-
sion: (i) how to dene which are the relevant observations and the "normal"
cases; (ii) how to generate the new synthetic examples (i.e. over-sampling);
and (iii) how to determine the value of the target variable in the synthetic
examples. Regarding the rst issue, a relevance function and a user-specied
threshold were used to dene DRandDNsets. The observations in DRare
over-sampled, while cases in DNare under-sampled. For the generation of
new synthetic examples the same interpolation method used in SMOTE for
classication was applied. Finally, the target value of each synthetic exam-
ple was calculated as an weighted average of the target variable values of
the two seed examples. The weights were calculated as an inverse function
of the distance of the generated case to each of the two seed examples.
Some drawbacks identied in the SMOTE algorithm motivated the ap-
pearance of several variants of this method (Barua et al., 2012; Han et al.,
2005; Bunkhumpornpat et al., 2009; Chawla et al., 2003; He et al., 2008;
Maciejewski and Stefanowski, 2011; Ramentol et al., 2012b; Verbiest et al.,
2012; Stefanowski and Wilk, 2007).
We can identify three main types of SMOTE variants: (i) application
19
of some pre- or post- processing before or after the use of SMOTE; (ii)
apply SMOTE only in some selected regions of the input space; or (iii)
introducing small modications to the SMOTE algorithm. Most of the
rst type of SMOTE variants start by applying the SMOTE algorithm
and, afterwards, use a post-processing mechanism for removing some data.
Examples of this type of approaches include: SMOTE+Tomek (Batista
et al., 2004), SMOTE+ENN (Batista et al., 2004), SMOTE+FRST (Ra-
mentol et al., 2012b) or SMOTE+RSB (Ramentol et al., 2012a). An ex-
ception is the Fuzzy Rough Imbalanced Prototype Selection (FRIPS) (Ver-
biest et al., 2012) method that pre-processes the data set before applying
the SMOTE algorithm. The second type of SMOTE variants only gener-
ates synthetic examples in specic regions that are considered useful for
the learning algorithms. As the notion of what is a good region is not
straightforward, several strategies were developed. Some of these variants
focus the synthesising eort on the borders between classes while others try
to nd which are the harder to learn instances and concentrate on these
ones. Examples of these approaches are: Borderline-SMOTE (Han et al.,
2005), ADASYN (He et al., 2008), Modied Synthetic Minority Oversam-
pling Technique (MSMOTE) (Hu et al., 2009), MWMOTE (Barua et al.,
2012), FSMOTE (Zhang et al., 2011), among others. Regarding the last type
of SMOTE variants, some modications are introduced in the way SMOTE
generates the synthetic examples. For instance, the synthetic examples may
be generated closer or further apart from a seed depending on some mea-
sure. The following proposals are examples within this group: Safe-Level-
SMOTE (Bunkhumpornpat et al., 2009), Safe Level Graph (Bunkhumporn-
pat and Subpaiboonkit, 2013), LN-SMOTE (Maciejewski and Stefanowski,
2011) and DBSMOTE (Bunkhumpornpat et al., 2012).
Another approach to re-sampling concerns the use of Evolutionary Algo-
rithms (EA). These algorithms started to be applied to imbalanced domains
as a strategy to perform under-sampling through a prototype selection (PS)
procedure (e.g. Garc a et al. (2006a); Garc a and Herrera (2009)).
Garc a et al. (2006a) made one of the rst contributions with a new
evolutionary method proposed for balancing the data set. The method pre-
sented uses a new tness function designed to perform a prototype selection
process. Some proposals have also emerged in the area of heuristics and
metrics for improving several genetic programming classiers performance
in imbalanced domains (Doucette and Heywood, 2008).
However, EA have been used for more than under-sampling. More re-
cently, Genetic Algorithms (GA) and clustering techniques were combined
to perform both under and over-sampling (Maheshwari et al., 2011; Yong,
2012). Evolutionary under-sampling has also been combined with boosting
(Galar et al., 2013).
Finally, several other interesting methods have appeared which combine
some of the previous techniques (Stefanowski and Wilk, 2008; Bunkhumporn-
20
pat et al., 2011; Songwattanasiri and Sinapiromsaran, 2010; Yang and Gao,
2012). For instance, Jeatrakul et al. (2010) presents a method that uses
Complementary Neural Networks (CMTNN) to perform under-sampling and
combines it with SMOTE. The combination of strategies was also applied
to ensembles (e.g. Liu et al. (2006); Mease et al. (2007); Chen et al. (2010)).
Some attention has also been given to SVMs, leading to proposals such
as the one of Kang and Cho (2006) where an ensemble of under-sampled
SVMs is presented. Multiple dierent training sets are built by sampling
examplesfrom the majority class and combining them with the minority
class examples. Each training set is used for training an individual SVM
classier. The ensemble is produced by aggregating the outputs of all indi-
vidual classiers. Another similar approach is the EnSVM (Liu et al., 2006)
which adopts a rebalance strategy combining the over-sampling strategy of
SMOTE algorithm and under-sampling to form a number of new training
sets while using all the positive examples.Then, an ensemble of SVMs is
built.
Several ensembles have been adapted and combined with re-sampling
approaches to better tackle the problem of imbalanced domains. Essentially,
for every type of ensembles, some attempt has been made. For a more
complete review on ensembles for the class imbalance problem see Galar
et al. (2012).
4.1.2 Active Learning
Active learning is a semi-supervised strategy in which the learning algorithm
is able to interactively obtain information from the user. Although this
method is traditionally used with unlabelled data, it can also be applied
when all class labels are known. In this case, the active learning strategy
provides the ability of actively selecting the best, i.e. the most informative,
examples to learn from.
Several approaches for imbalanced domains based on active learning have
been proposed (Ertekin et al., 2007b,a; Zhu and Hovy, 2007; Ertekin, 2013).
These approaches are concentrated on SVM learning systems and are based
on the fact that, for this type of learners, the most informative examples are
the ones closest to the hyperplane.
This property is used to guide under-sampling by selecting the most
informative examples , i.e., choosing the examples closer to the hyperplane.
More recent developments try to combine active learning with other tech-
niques to further improve learners performance. Ertekin (2013) presents a
novel adaptive over-sampling algorithm named Virtual Instances Resam-
pling Technique Using Active Learning (VIRTUAL), that combines the
benets of over-sampling and active learning. Contrary to traditional re-
sampling methods, which are applied before the training stage, VIRTUAL
generates synthetic examples for the minority class during the training pro-
21
cess. Therefore, the need for a separate pre-processing step is discarded.
In the context of learning with SVMs, VIRTUAL outperforms competitive
over-sampling techniques both in terms of generalisation performance and
computational complexity. Mi (2013) developed a method that combines
SMOTE and active learning with SVMs.
Some eorts have also been made for integrating active learning with
other classiers. Hu (2012) proposed an active learning method for im-
balance data using the Localized Generalization Error Model (L-GEM) of
radial basis function neural networks (RBFNN).
4.1.3 Weighting the Data Space
The strategy of weighting the data space is a way of implementing cost-
sensitive learning. In fact, misclassication costs are applied to the given
data set with the goal of selecting the best training distribution. Essen-
tially, this method is based on the fact that changing the original sampling
distribution by multiplying each case by a factor that is proportional to
its importance (relative cost), allows any standard learner to accomplish
expected cost minimisation on the original distribution. Although it is a
simple technique and easy to apply, it also has some drawbacks. There is
a risk of model overtting and it is also possible that the real cost values
are unavailable which can introduce the extra diculty of exploring eective
cost setups.
This approach has a strong theoretical foundation, building on the Trans-
lation Theorem derived by Zadrozny et al. (2003). Namely, to obtain a
modied distribution biased towards the costly classes, the training set dis-
tribution is modied with regards to misclassication costs. Zadrozny et al.
(2003) presented two dierent ways of accomplishing this conversion: in a
transparent box or in a black box way. In the rst, the weights are provided
to the classier while for the second a careful subsampling is performed
according to the same weights. The rst approach cannot be applied to
an arbitrary learner, while the second one results in severe overtting if
re-sampling with replacement is used. Thus, to overcome the drawbacks
of the later approach, the authors have presented a method called cost-
proportionate rejection sampling which accepts each example in the input
sample with probability proportional to its associated weight.
Wang and Japkowicz (2010) proposes an ensemble of SVMs with asym-
metric misclassication costs. The proposed system works by modifying
the base classier (SVM) using costs and uses boosting as the combination
scheme.
22
Strategy type (Section) Main References
Special-purpose Learning Methods
(4.2)Maloof (2003); Akbani et al. (2004); Tang et al. (2009);
Weiguo et al. (2012); Zhou and Liu (2006);
Oh (2011); Castro and de P adua Braga (2013);
Sun et al. (2007); Song et al. (2009); Chen et al. (2004);
Joshi et al. (2001); Hwang et al. (2011);
Alejo et al. (2007); Cao et al. (2013);
Wu and Chang (2003); Imam et al. (2006);
Tang and Zhang (2006); Batuwita and Palade (2010b)
Li et al. (2009); Barandela et al. (2003);
Huang et al. (2004); Liu et al. (2010); Tan et al. (2003);
Cieslak et al. (2012); Rodr guez et al. (2012);
Wu and Chang (2005); Xiao et al. (2012);
Cieslak and Chawla (2008); Ribeiro (2011);
Torgo and Ribeiro (2003); Ribeiro and Torgo (2003)
Table 4: Special-purpose Learning Methods, corresponding section and main
bibliographic references
4.2 Special-purpose Learning Methods
The approaches at this level consist of solutions that modify existing algo-
rithms to provide a better t to the imbalanced training data. The task of
developing a solution based on algorithm modications is not an easy one.
It requires a deep knowledge of both the learning algorithm and the target
domain. In order to perform a modication on a selected algorithm, it is
essential to understand why it fails when the distribution is skewed. Also,
some of the adaptations assume that a cost/cost-benet matrix is known for
dierent error types, which is frequently not the case. On the other hand,
these methods have the advantage of being very eective in the contexts for
which they were designed.
Existing solutions for dealing with imbalanced domains at the learning
level are focused on the introduction of modications in the algorithm pref-
erence criteria.
Table 4 summarizes the main bibliographic references for strategies in-
volving modications of algorithms.
The incorporation of benets and/or costs (negative benets) in existing
algorithms, as a way to express the utility of dierent predictions, is one of
the known approaches to cope with imbalanced domains. This includes the
well known cost-sensitive algorithms for classication tasks which directly
incorporate costs in the learning process. In this case, the goal of the predic-
tion task is to minimise the total cost, knowing that misclassied examples
may have dierent costs. In an imbalanced context, the cost of misclas-
sifying a minority class example is superior to the cost of misclassifying a
majority class example and, usually, there is no cost associated with making
a correct prediction.
The research literature includes several works describing the adaptation
23
of dierent classiers in order to make them cost-sensitive. For decision
trees, the impact of the incorporation of costs under imbalanced domains
was addressed by Maloof (2003)Regarding support vector machines several
ways of integrating costs have been considered such as assigning dierent
penalties to false negatives and positives (Akbani et al., 2004) or including a
weighted attribute strategy (Yuanhong et al., 2009) among others (Weiguo
et al., 2012). Regarding neural networks, the possibility of making them
cost-sensitive has also been considered (e.g. Zhou and Liu (2006); Alejo
et al. (2007); Oh (2011)). A Cost-Sensitive Multilayer Perceptron (CSMLP)
algorithm was proposed by Castro and de P adua Braga (2013) for asym-
metrical learning of MLPs via a modied (backpropagation) weight update
rule. Cao et al. (2013) present a framework for improving the performance of
cost-sensitive neural networks that uses Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO)
for optimizing misclassication cost, feature subset and intrinsic structure
parameters. Alejo et al. (2007) propose two strategies for dealing with im-
balanced domains using RBF neural networks which include a cost function
in the training phase.
Ensembles have also been considered in the cost-sensitive framework to
handle imbalanced domains. Several ensemble methods have been success-
fully adapted to include costs during the learning phase. However, boost-
ing was the most extensively explored. AdaBoost is the most represen-
tative algorithm of the boosting family. When the class distribution is
imbalanced, AdaBoost biases the learning (through the weights) towards
the majority class, as it contributes more to the overall accuracy. Several
proposals appeared which modify AdaBoost weight update process by in-
corporating cost items so that examples from dierent classes are treated
unequally. Important proposals in the context of imbalanced distributions
are: RareBoost (Joshi et al., 2001), AdaC1, AdaC2 and AdaC3 (Sun et al.,
2007), and BABoost (Song et al., 2009). All of them modify the AdaBoost
algorithm by introducing costs in the used weight updating formula. These
proposals dier in how they modify the update rule. Random Forests have
also been adapted to better cope with imbalanced domains undergoing a
cost-sensitive transformation. Chen et al. (2004) proposes a method called
Weighted Random Forest (WRF) for dealing with highly-skewed class dis-
tributions based on the Random Forest algorithm. WRF strategy operates
by assigning a higher misclassication cost to the minority class. For an
extensive review on ensembles for handling class imbalance see Galar et al.
(2012).
Several other solutions exist that also modify the preference criteria of
the algorithms while not relying directly on the denition of a cost/cost-
benet matrix. Regarding SVMs, several proposals try to bias the algorithm
so that the hyperplane is further away from the positive class because the
skew associated with imbalanced data sets pushes the hyperplane closer to
the positive class. Wu and Chang (2003) accomplish this with an algorithm
24
that changes the kernel function. Fuzzy Support Vector Machines for Class
Imbalance Learning (FSVM-CIL) was a method proposed by Batuwita and
Palade (2010b). This algorithm is based on an SVM variant for handling
the problem of outliers and noise called FSVM (Lin and Wang, 2002)and
improves it for also dealing with imbalanced data sets. Potential Support
Vector Machine (P-SVM) diers from standard SVM learners by dening a
new objective function and constraints. An improved P-SVM algorithm (Li
et al., 2009) was proposed to better cope with imbalanced data sets.
k-NN learners were also adapted to cope with the imbalance problem.
Barandela et al. (2003) present a weighted distance function to be used in the
classication phase of k-NN without changing the class distribution. This
method assigns dierent weights to the respective classes and not to the
individual prototypes. Since more weight is given to the majority class, the
distance to minority class examples becomes much lower than the distance
to examples from the majority class. This biases the learner to nd their
nearest neighbour among examples of the minority class.
A new decision tree algorithm - Class Condence Proportion Decision
Tree (CCPDT) - was proposed by Liu et al. (2010). CCPDT is robust
and insensitive to class distribution and generates rules that are statistically
signicant. The algorithm adopts a new proposed measure,called Class Con-
dence Proportion (CCP), which forms the basis of CCPDT. CCP measure
is embedded in the information gain and used as the splitting criteria. In
this algorithm, a new approach , using Fisher exact test, to prune branches
of the tree that are not statistically signicant is presented.
Hellinger distance was introduced as a decision tree splitting criterion
to build Hellinger Distance Decision Trees (HDDT) (Cieslak and Chawla,
2008). This proposal was shown to be insensitive towards class distribution
skewness. More recently, Cieslak et al. (2012) recommended the use of
bagged HDDTs as the preferred method for dealing with imbalanced data
sets when using decision trees.
For regression tasks, some works have addressed the problem of imbal-
anced domains by changing the splitting criteria of regression trees (e.g.
Torgo and Ribeiro (2003); Ribeiro and Torgo (2003)).
In Wu and Chang (2005) the Kernel Boundary Alignment algorithm
(KBA) is proposed. This method adjusts the boundary towards the ma-
jority class by modifying the kernel matrix generated by a kernel function
according to the imbalanced data distribution.
An ensemble method for learning over multi-class imbalanced data sets,
named ensemble Knowledge for Imbalance Sample Sets (eKISS), was pro-
posed by Tan et al. (2003). This algorithm was specically designed to
increase classiers sensitivity without losing the corresponding specicity.
The eKISS approach combines the rules of the base classiers to generate
new classiers for nal decision making.
Recently, more sophisticated approaches were proposed as the Dynamic
25
Classier Ensemble method for Imbalanced Data (DCEID) presented by
Xiao et al. (2012). DCEID combines dynamic ensemble learning with cost-
sensitive learning and is able to adaptively select the more appropriate en-
semble approach.
For regression problems one work exists that is able to tackle the prob-
lem of imbalanced domains through an utility-based algorithm. The utility-
based Rules (ubaRules) approach was proposed by Ribeiro (2011). ubaRules
is an utility-based regression rule ensemble system designed for obtaining
models biased according to a specic utility-based metric. The system main
goal is to obtain accurate and interpretable predictions in the context of
regression problems with non-uniform utility. It consists in two main steps:
generation of dierent regression trees, which are converted to rule ensem-
bles, and selection of the best rules to include in the nal ensemble. An
utility function is used as criterion at several stages of the algorithm.
All these algorithm modication strategies are specically designed to
address the problem of imbalanced domains and have great potential. How-
ever, some disadvantages exist, such as: i) an often unavailable cost/cost-
benet matrix; ii) the need of a deep knowledge of the selected learner to
accomplish a good modication of the preference criteria and iii) the di-
culty of using an already existing method with a dierent learning system
which contrasts with pre-processing approaches.
4.3 Prediction Post-processing
For dealing with imbalanced domains at the post-processing level, we will
consider two main types of solutions:
threshold method: uses the ranking provided by a score, that ex-
presses the degree to which an example is a member of a class, to
produce several learners by varying the threshold for class member-
ship;
cost-sensitive post-processing: associates costs to prediction er-
rors and minimizes the expected cost.
Table 5 summarizes the main bibliographic references of post-processing
strategies.
4.3.1 Threshold Method
Some classiers are named soft classiers because they provide a score which
expresses the degree to which an example is a member of a class. This score
can, in fact, be used as a threshold to generate other classiers. This task
can be accomplished by varying the threshold for an example belonging to
a class Weiss (2004). A study of this method (Maloof, 2003) concluded
that the operations of moving the decision threshold, applying a sampling
26
Strategy type (Section) Main References
Threshold Method
(4.3.1)Maloof (2003); Weiss (2004)
Cost-sensitive Post-processing
(4.3.2)Hern andez-Orallo (2012, 2014)
Table 5: Post-processing strategy types, corresponding sections and main
bibliographic references
strategy, and adjusting the cost matrix produce classiers with the same
performance.
4.3.2 Cost-sensitive Post-processing
Several methods exist for making models cost-sensitive in a post hoc manner.
This type of strategy was mainly explored for classication tasks and aims
at changing only the model predictions for making it cost-sensitive (e.g.
Domingos (1999); Sinha and May (2004)). This means that these approaches
could potentially be applicable to imbalanced data distributions. However,
to the best of our knowledge, these methods have never been applied or
evaluated on these tasks.
In regression , introducing costs at a post-processing level has only re-
cently been proposed (Bansal et al., 2008; Zhao et al., 2011). It is an issue
still under-explored with few limited solutions. Similarly to what happens
in classication, no progress was yet made for evaluating these solutions
in imbalanced domains. However, one interesting proposal called refram-
ing (Hern andez-Orallo, 2012, 2014) was recently presented. Although not
developed specically for imbalanced domains, this framework aims at ad-
justing the predictions of a previously built model to dierent data distri-
butions. Therefore, it is also potentially suitable for being applied to the
problem of imbalanced domains. The notion of reframing was established
as the process of applying a previously built model to a new operating con-
text by the proper transformation of inputs, outputs and patterns. The
reframing framework acts at a post-processing level, changing the obtained
predictions by adapting them to a dierent distribution.
The reframing method essentially consists of two steps:
the conversion of any traditional crisp regression model with one pa-
rameter into a soft regression model with two parameters, seen as a
normal conditional density estimator (NCDE), by the use of enrich-
ment methods;
the reframing of an enriched soft regression model to new contexts by
an instance-dependent optimisation of the expected loss derived from
the conditional normal distribution.
27
Strategy type (Section) Main References
Re-sampling and Special-purpose Learning Methods
(4.4.1)Phua et al. (2004); Kotsiantis and Pintelas (2003);
Estabrooks and Japkowicz (2001); Estabrooks et al. (2004);
Yoon and Kwek (2005); Liu et al. (2009)
Table 6: Hybrid strategies, corresponding sections and main bibliographic
references
4.4 Hybrid Methods
In recent years, several methods involving the combination of some of the
basic approaches described in the previous sections, have appeared in the
research literature. Due to their characteristics these methods can be seen as
hybrid methods to handle imbalanced distributions. They try to capitalise
on some of the main advantages of the dierent approaches we have described
previously.
Existing hybrid approaches combine the use of re-sampling strategies
with special-purpose learning algorithms. Table 6 summarizes the main
bibliographic references concerning these strategies.
4.4.1 Re-sampling and Special-purpose Learning Methods
One of the rst hybrid strategies was presented by Estabrooks and Japkowicz
(2001) and Estabrooks et al. (2004). The motivation for this proposal is
related to the fact that a perfectly balanced data may not be optimal and
that the right amount of over/under-sample to apply is dicult to determine.
To overcome these diculties, a mixture-of-experts framework was proposed
(Estabrooks and Japkowicz, 2001; Estabrooks et al., 2004) in an architecture
with three levels: a classier level, an expert level and an output level. The
system has two experts in the expert level: an under-sampling expert and
an over-sampling expert. The architecture incorporates 10 classiers on
the over-sampling expert and another 10 classiers on the under-sampling
expert. All these classiers are trained in data sets re-sampled at dierent
rates of over and under-sampling, respectively. At the classier level an
elimination strategy is applied for removing the learners that are considered
unreliable according to a predened test. Then a combination scheme is
applied both at the expert and output levels. These combination schemes
use the following simple heuristic: if one of the classiers decides that the
example is positive so does the expert, and if one of the two experts decides
that the example is positive so does the output level. This strategy is clearly
heavily biased towards the minority (positive) class.
A dierent idea involving re-sampling and the combination of dierent
learners was proposed by Kotsiantis and Pintelas (2003). The proposed
approach uses a facilitator agent and three learning agents each one with
its own learning system. The facilitator starts by ltering the features of
28
the data set. The ltered data is then passed to the three learning agents.
Each learning agent re-samples the data set, learns using the respective
system (Naive Bayes, C4.5 and 5NN) and returns the predictions for each
instance back to the facilitator agent. Finally, the facilitator makes the nal
prediction according to majority voting.
In the proposal of Phua et al. (2004) re-sampling is performed and then
stacking and boosting are used together. The applied re-sampling strategy
partitions the data set into eleven new data sets which include all the mi-
nority class examples and a portion of the majority class examples. The
proposed system uses three dierent learners (Naive Bayes, C4.5 and back-
propagation classier) each one processing the eleven partitions of the data.
Bagging is used to combine the classiers trained by the same algorithm.
Then stacking is used to combine the multiple classiers generated by the
dierent algorithms identifying the best mix of classiers.
Other approaches combine pre-processing techniques with bagging and
boosting, simultaneously, composing an ensemble of ensembles. EasyEnsem-
ble and BalanceCascade algorithms (Liu et al., 2009) are examples of this
type of approach. Both algorithms use bagging as the main ensemble method
and use Adaboost for training each bag. As for the pre-processing tech-
nique, both construct balanced bags by randomly under-sampling examples
from the majority class. In EasyEnsemble algorithm all Adaboost iterations
can be performed simultaneously because each Adaboost ensemble uses a
previously determined subset of the data. All the generated classiers are
combined for a nal solution. On the other hand, in the BalanceCascade
algorithm, after the Adaboost learning, the majority examples correctly
classied with higher condence are discarded from further iterations.
Wang (2008) presents an approach that combines the SMOTE algorithm
with Biased-SVM (Veropoulos et al., 1999). The proposed approach applies
the Biased-SVM in the imbalanced data and stores the obtained support
vectors from both classes. Then SMOTE is used to over-sample the support
vectors with two alternatives: only use the obtained support vectors or use
the entire minority class. A nal classication is obtained with the new data
using the biased-SVM.
Finally, a strategy using a clustering method based on class purity max-
imization is proposed by Yoon and Kwek (2005). This method generates
clusters of pure majority class examples and non-pure clusters based on the
improvement of the clusters class purity. When the clusters are formed, all
minority class examples are added to the non-pure clusters and a decision
tree is built for each cluster. An unlabelled example is clustered according
to the same algorithm. If it falls on a non-pure cluster, the decision tree
committee votes the prediction, but if it falls on a pure majority class cluster
the nal prediction is the majority class.If the committee votes for a ma-
jority class prediction, then that will be the nal prediction. Onn the other
hand, if it is a minority class prediction, then the example will be submitted
29
to a nal classier which is constructed using a neural network.
5 Related Problems
In this section we describe some problems that frequently coexist with imbal-
anced data distributions and further contribute to degrade the performance
of predictive models. These related problems have been addressed mainly
within a classication setting. Problems such as small disjuncts, class over-
lap and small sample size, usually coexist with imbalanced classication
domains and are also identied as possible causes of classiers performance
degradation (Weiss, 2004; He and Garcia, 2009; Sun et al., 2009). We will
briey describe the major developments made for the following related prob-
lems: class overlapping or class separability, small sample size and lack of
density in the training set, high dimensionality of the data set, noisy data
and small disjuncts.
The overlap problem occurs when a given region of the data space con-
tains an identical number of training cases for each class. In this situation, a
learner will have an increased diculty in distinguishing between the classes
present on the overlapping region. The problems of imbalanced data sets
and overlapping regions were mostly treated separately. However, in the
last decade, some attention was given to the relationship between these two
problems (Prati et al., 2004a; Garc a et al., 2006b). The combination of
imbalanced domains with overlapping regions causes an important deterio-
ration of the learner performance and both problems acting together produce
much more diculties than expected when considering their eects individ-
ually (Denil and Trappenberg, 2010). Recent works (Alejo Eleuterio et al.,
2011; Alejo et al., 2013) presented combinations of solutions for handling,
simultaneously, both the class imbalance and the class overlap problem and
apply a blend of techniques for addressing these issues.
The small training set, or small sample problem, is also naturally related
with imbalanced domains. In eect, having too few examples from the
minority class will prevent the learner from capturing their characteristics
and will hinder the generalisation capability of the algorithm. The relation
between imbalanced domains and small sample problems was addressed by
Japkowicz and Stephen (2002) and Jo and Japkowicz (2004), where it was
highlighted that class imbalance degrades classication performance in small
data sets although this loss of performance tends to gradually reduce as
the training set size increases. As expected, the subconcepts dened by
the minority class examples can be better learned if their number can be
increased.
The small sample problem may trigger problems such as rare cases
(Weiss, 2005), which bring an additional diculty to the learning system.
Rare examples are extremely scarce cases that are dicult to detect and use
30
for generalisation. The small training set problem may also be accompanied
by a variable class distribution that may not match the target distribution.
Forman and Cohen (2004) showed that, for imbalanced domains, obtaining
a balanced training set is not the most favourable setting and classiers
performance can be greatly improved by non-random sampling that favours
the minority class.
In some domains, such as text classication, the imbalance problem co-
exists with high dimensional data sets, i.e., domains with a high number of
predictors. The main challenge here is to adequately select features that con-
tain the key information of the problem. Feature selection is recommended
(Wasikowski and Chen, 2010) and is also pointed as the solution for address-
ing the class imbalance problem (Mladenic and Grobelnik, 1999; Zheng et al.,
2004; Chen and Wasikowski, 2008; Van Der Putten and Van Someren, 2004;
Forman, 2003). Several proposals exist for handling the imbalance problem
in conjunction with the high dimensionality problem, all using a feature se-
lection strategy (Zheng et al., 2004; Del Castillo and Serrano, 2004; Forman
and Cohen, 2004; Chu et al., 2010).
Noise is a known factor that usually aects models performance. In im-
balanced domains, noisy data has a greater impact on the least represented
examples (Weiss, 2004). A recent study (Seiert et al., 2011) on the eect
of noise in a data set intrinsically characterised by the presence of both
class imbalance and class noise concluded that, generally, class noise has a
more signicant impact on learners than imbalance. It was also noticed that
the interaction between the level of imbalance and the level of noise within
a data set is a signicant factor, and that studying these two cal eects
individually may not be sucient.
One of the most studied related problems is the problem of small dis-
juncts which is associated to the imbalance in the subclusters of each class in
the data set (Japkowicz, 2001; Jo and Japkowicz, 2004). When a subcluster
has a low coverage , i.e., it classies few examples, it is called small (Holte
et al., 1989). Small disjuncts are a problem because the learners are typi-
cally biased towards classifying large disjuncts and therefore they will tend
to overt and misclassify the cases in the small disjuncts. This problem is of-
ten present along with the problem of class imbalance in real world data sets
and the connection between the two problems is not yet well understood Jo
and Japkowicz (2004). Due to the importance of these two problems, several
works address the relation between the problem of small disjuncts and the
class imbalance problem (Japkowicz, 2003; Weiss and Provost, 2003; Jo and
Japkowicz, 2004; Pearson et al., 2003; Japkowicz, 2001; Prati et al., 2004b).
A new metric called error concentration (Weiss and Hirsh, 2000) was pro-
posed for evaluating the error concentration towards the smaller disjuncts.
The work in Weiss (2010) analyses the impact of several factors on small
disjuncts and in the error distribution across disjuncts. Among the studied
factors are pruning, training-set size, noise and class imbalance. Regarding
31
pruning, it was not considered an eective strategy for dealing with small
disjuncts in the presence of class imbalance (Prati et al., 2004b; Weiss, 2010).
Weiss (2010) also concluded that even with a balanced data set, errors tend
to be concentrated towards the smaller disjuncts. However, when there is
class imbalance, the error concentration increases. Moreover, the increase
in the class imbalance also increases the error concentration. Thus, class
imbalance is partly responsible for the problem with small disjuncts, and
articially modifying the class distribution of the training data to be more
balanced, causes a decrease in the error concentration.
All the considered problems coexist and are related with the imbalance
problem. The conjunction of these problems with imbalanced domains tends
to further degrade the classiers performance and therefore this relationship
should not be ignored.
6 Conclusions
Imbalanced domains pose important challenges to existing approaches to
predictive modelling. In this paper we propose a formulation of the problem
of modelling using imbalanced data sets that includes both classication
and regression tasks. We present a survey of the state of the art solutions
for obtaining and evaluating predictive models for both classication and
regression tasks. We propose a new taxonomy for the existing approaches
grouping them into: (i) data pre-processing, (ii) special-purpose learning
methods and (iii) prediction post-processing.
Most existing solutions to modelling under imbalanced distributions are
focused on classication tasks. This fact is also present on previous surveys
of this important research area. In this paper, we propose the rst sur-
vey that also addresses existing approaches to imbalanced data sets within
regression tasks.
Finally, we describe some problems that are strongly related with imbal-
anced data distributions, highlighting works that explore the relationship of
these other problems with imbalance data sets.
References
Akbani, R., Kwek, S., and Japkowicz, N. (2004). Applying support vector
machines to imbalanced datasets. In Machine Learning: ECML 2004 ,
pages 39{50. Springer.
Alejo, R., Garc a, V., Sotoca, J. M., Mollineda, R. A., and S anchez, J. S.
(2007). Improving the performance of the rbf neural networks trained
with imbalanced samples. In Computational and Ambient Intelligence ,
pages 162{169. Springer.
32
Alejo, R., Valdovinos, R. M., Garc a, V., and Pacheco-Sanchez, J. (2013).
A hybrid method to face class overlap and class imbalance on neural net-
works and multi-class scenarios. Pattern Recognition Letters , 34(4):380{
388.
Alejo Eleuterio, R., Mart nez Sotoca, J., Garc a Jim enez, V., and Valdovi-
nos Rosas, R. M. (2011). Back propagation with balanced mse cost func-
tion and nearest neighbor editing for handling class overlap and class
imbalance.
Bansal, G., Sinha, A. P., and Zhao, H. (2008). Tuning data mining methods
for cost-sensitive regression: a study in loan charge-o forecasting. Journal
of Management Information Systems , 25(3):315{336.
Barandela, R., S anchez, J. S., Garca, V., and Rangel, E. (2003). Strategies
for learning in class imbalance problems. Pattern Recognition , 36(3):849{
851.
Barua, S., Islam, M., Yao, X., and Murase, K. (2012). Mwmote-majority
weighted minority oversampling technique for imbalanced data set learn-
ing.
Batista, G. E., Prati, R. C., and Monard, M. C. (2004). A study of the
behavior of several methods for balancing machine learning training data.
ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter , 6(1):20{29.
Batuwita, R. and Palade, V. (2009). A new performance measure for class
imbalance learning. application to bioinformatics problems. In Machine
Learning and Applications, 2009. ICMLA'09. International Conference
on, pages 545{550. IEEE.
Batuwita, R. and Palade, V. (2010a). Ecient resampling methods for
training support vector machines with imbalanced datasets. In Neural
Networks (IJCNN), The 2010 International Joint Conference on , pages
1{8. IEEE.
Batuwita, R. and Palade, V. (2010b). Fsvm-cil: fuzzy support vector ma-
chines for class imbalance learning. Fuzzy Systems, IEEE Transactions
on, 18(3):558{571.
Batuwita, R. and Palade, V. (2012). Adjusted geometric-mean: a novel per-
formance measure for imbalanced bioinformatics datasets learning. Jour-
nal of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology , 10(04).
Bellinger, C., Sharma, S., and Japkowicz, N. (2012). One-class versus binary
classication: Which and when? In Machine Learning and Applications
(ICMLA), 2012 11th International Conference on , volume 2, pages 102{
106. IEEE.
33
Bi, J. and Bennett, K. P. (2003). Regression error characteristic curves. In
Proc. of the 20th Int. Conf. on Machine Learning , pages 43{50.
Bradley, A. P. (1997). The use of the area under the roc curve in the evalua-
tion of machine learning algorithms. Pattern recognition , 30(7):1145{1159.
Breiman, L., Friedman, J. H., Olshen, R. A., and Stone, C. J. (1984). Clas-
sication and regression trees. wadsworth & brooks. Monterey, CA .
Bunkhumpornpat, C., Sinapiromsaran, K., and Lursinsap, C. (2009). Safe-
level-smote: Safe-level-synthetic minority over-sampling technique for
handling the class imbalanced problem. In Advances in Knowledge Dis-
covery and Data Mining , pages 475{482. Springer.
Bunkhumpornpat, C., Sinapiromsaran, K., and Lursinsap, C. (2011). Mute:
Majority under-sampling technique. In Information, Communications and
Signal Processing (ICICS) 2011 8th International Conference on , pages
1{4. IEEE.
Bunkhumpornpat, C., Sinapiromsaran, K., and Lursinsap, C. (2012). Db-
smote: Density-based synthetic minority over-sampling technique. Ap-
plied Intelligence , 36(3):664{684.
Bunkhumpornpat, C. and Subpaiboonkit, S. (2013). Safe level graph for
synthetic minority over-sampling techniques. In Communications and In-
formation Technologies (ISCIT), 2013 13th International Symposium on ,
pages 570{575. IEEE.
Cain, M. and Janssen, C. (1995). Real estate price prediction under asym-
metric loss. Annals of the Institute of Statistical Mathematics , 47(3):401{
414.
Cao, P., Zhao, D., and Za ane, O. R. (2013). A pso-based cost-sensitive neu-
ral network for imbalanced data classication. In Trends and Applications
in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 452{463. Springer.
Castro, C. L. and de P adua Braga, A. (2013). Novel cost-sensitive approach
to improve the multilayer perceptron performance on imbalanced data.
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learning Syst. , 24(6):888{899.
Chang, E. Y., Li, B., Wu, G., and Goh, K. (2003). Statistical learning for
eective visual information retrieval. In ICIP (3) , pages 609{612.
Chawla, N. V., Bowyer, K. W., Hall, L. O., and Kegelmeyer, W. P. (2002).
Smote: Synthetic minority over-sampling technique. JAIR , 16:321{357.
Chawla, N. V., Cieslak, D. A., Hall, L. O., and Joshi, A. (2008). Automat-
ically countering imbalance and its empirical relationship to cost. Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery , 17(2):225{252.
34
Chawla, N. V., Hall, L. O., and Joshi, A. (2005). Wrapper-based compu-
tation and evaluation of sampling methods for imbalanced datasets. In
Proceedings of the 1st international workshop on Utility-based data min-
ing, pages 24{33. ACM.
Chawla, N. V., Japkowicz, N., and Kotcz, A. (2004). Editorial: special
issue on learning from imbalanced data sets. ACM SIGKDD Explorations
Newsletter , 6(1):1{6.
Chawla, N. V., Lazarevic, A., Hall, L. O., and Bowyer, K. W. (2003). Smote-
boost: Improving prediction of the minority class in boosting. In Knowl-
edge Discovery in Databases: PKDD 2003 , pages 107{119. Springer.
Chen, C., Liaw, A., and Breiman, L. (2004). Using random forest to learn
imbalanced data. University of California, Berkeley .
Chen, S., He, H., and Garcia, E. A. (2010). Ramoboost: Ranked minor-
ity oversampling in boosting. Neural Networks, IEEE Transactions on ,
21(10):1624{1642.
Chen, X.-w. and Wasikowski, M. (2008). Fast: a roc-based feature selection
metric for small samples and imbalanced data classication problems.
InProceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining , pages 124{132. ACM.
Christoersen, P. F. and Diebold, F. X. (1996). Further results on fore-
casting and model selection under asymmetric loss. Journal of applied
econometrics , 11(5):561{571.
Christoersen, P. F. and Diebold, F. X. (1997). Optimal prediction under
asymmetric loss. Econometric theory , 13(06):808{817.
Chu, L., Gao, H., and Chang, W. (2010). A new feature weighting method
based on probability distribution in imbalanced text classication. In
Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge Discovery (FSKD), 2010 Seventh Interna-
tional Conference on , volume 5, pages 2335{2339. IEEE.
Chyi, Y.-M. (2003). Classication analysis techniques for skewed class dis-
tribution problems. Master Thesis, Department of Information Manage-
ment, National Sun Yat-Sen University .
Cieslak, D. A. and Chawla, N. V. (2008). Learning decision trees for unbal-
anced data. In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases ,
pages 241{256. Springer.
Cieslak, D. A., Hoens, T. R., Chawla, N. V., and Kegelmeyer, W. P. (2012).
Hellinger distance decision trees are robust and skew-insensitive. Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery , 24(1):136{158.
35
Cohen, G., Hilario, M., Sax, H., Hugonnet, S., and Geissbuhler, A. (2006).
Learning from imbalanced data in surveillance of nosocomial infection.
Articial Intelligence in Medicine , 37(1):7{18.
Crone, S. F., Lessmann, S., and Stahlbock, R. (2005). Utility based data
mining for time series analysis: cost-sensitive learning for neural network
predictors. In Proceedings of the 1st international workshop on Utility-
based data mining , pages 59{68. ACM.
Daskalaki, S., Kopanas, I., and Avouris, N. M. (2006). Evaluation of clas-
siers for an uneven class distribution problem. Applied Articial Intelli-
gence , 20(5):381{417.
Davis, J. and Goadrich, M. (2006). The relationship between precision-recall
and roc curves. In ICML'06: Proc. of the 23rd Int. Conf. on Machine
Learning , ACM ICPS, pages 233{240. ACM.
Del Castillo, M. D. and Serrano, J. I. (2004). A multistrategy approach for
digital text categorization from imbalanced documents. ACM SIGKDD
Explorations Newsletter , 6(1):70{79.
Denil, M. and Trappenberg, T. (2010). Overlap versus imbalance. In Ad-
vances in Articial Intelligence , pages 220{231. Springer.
Domingos, P. (1999). Metacost: A general method for making classiers
cost-sensitive. In KDD'99: Proceedings of the 5th International Confer-
ence on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 155{164. ACM
Press.
Doucette, J. and Heywood, M. I. (2008). Gp classication under imbal-
anced data sets: Active sub-sampling and auc approximation. In Genetic
Programming , pages 266{277. Springer.
Drown, D. J., Khoshgoftaar, T. M., and Seliya, N. (2009). Evolutionary sam-
pling and software quality modeling of high-assurance systems. Systems,
Man and Cybernetics, Part A: Systems and Humans, IEEE Transactions
on, 39(5):1097{1107.
Drummond, C. and Holte, R. C. (2003). C4. 5, class imbalance, and cost
sensitivity: why under-sampling beats over-sampling. In Workshop on
Learning from Imbalanced Datasets II , volume 11. Citeseer.
Egan, J. P. (1975). Signal detection theory and fROCganalysis.
Ertekin, S . (2013). Adaptive oversampling for imbalanced data classication.
InInformation Sciences and Systems 2013 , pages 261{269. Springer.
36
Ertekin, S ., Huang, J., Bottou, L., and Giles, L. (2007a). Learning on the
border: active learning in imbalanced data classication. In Proceedings of
the sixteenth ACM conference on Conference on information and knowl-
edge management , pages 127{136. ACM.
Ertekin, S ., Huang, J., and Giles, C. L. (2007b). Active learning for class
imbalance problem. In Proceedings of the 30th annual international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval ,
pages 823{824. ACM.
Estabrooks, A. and Japkowicz, N. (2001). A mixture-of-experts framework
for learning from imbalanced data sets. In Advances in Intelligent Data
Analysis , pages 34{43. Springer.
Estabrooks, A., Jo, T., and Japkowicz, N. (2004). A multiple resampling
method for learning from imbalanced data sets. Computational Intelli-
gence , 20(1):18{36.
Fern andez, A., del Jesus, M. J., and Herrera, F. (2010). On the 2-tuples
based genetic tuning performance for fuzzy rule based classication sys-
tems in imbalanced data-sets. Information Sciences , 180(8):1268{1291.
Fern andez, A., Garc a, S., del Jesus, M. J., and Herrera, F. (2008). A
study of the behaviour of linguistic fuzzy rule based classication sys-
tems in the framework of imbalanced data-sets. Fuzzy Sets and Systems ,
159(18):2378{2398.
Forman, G. (2003). An extensive empirical study of feature selection metrics
for text classication. The Journal of machine learning research , 3:1289{
1305.
Forman, G. and Cohen, I. (2004). Learning from little: Comparison of
classiers given little training. In Knowledge Discovery in Databases:
PKDD 2004 , pages 161{172. Springer.
Galar, M., Fern andez, A., Barrenechea, E., Bustince, H., and Herrera, F.
(2012). A review on ensembles for the class imbalance problem: bagging-,
boosting-, and hybrid-based approaches. Systems, Man, and Cybernetics,
Part C: Applications and Reviews, IEEE Transactions on , 42(4):463{484.
Galar, M., Fern andez, A., Barrenechea, E., and Herrera, F. (2013). Eus-
boost: Enhancing ensembles for highly imbalanced data-sets by evolu-
tionary undersampling. Pattern Recognition .
Garc a, Salvador Derrac, J., Triguero, I., Carmona, C. J., and Herrera, F.
(2012). Evolutionary-based selection of generalized instances for imbal-
anced classication. Knowledge-Based Systems , 25(1):3{12.
37
Garc a, S., Cano, J. R., Fern andez, A., and Herrera, F. (2006a). A proposal
of evolutionary prototype selection for class imbalance problems. In In-
telligent Data Engineering and Automated Learning{IDEAL 2006 , pages
1415{1423. Springer.
Garc a, S. and Herrera, F. (2009). Evolutionary undersampling for classi-
cation with imbalanced datasets: Proposals and taxonomy. Evolutionary
Computation , 17(3):275{306.
Garc a, V., Alejo, R., S anchez, J. S., Sotoca, J. M., and Mollineda,
R. A. (2006b). Combined eects of class imbalance and class overlap
on instance-based classication. In Intelligent Data Engineering and Au-
tomated Learning{IDEAL 2006 , pages 371{378. Springer.
Garc a, V., Mollineda, R. A., and S anchez, J. S. (2008). A new performance
evaluation method for two-class imbalanced problems. In Structural, Syn-
tactic, and Statistical Pattern Recognition , pages 917{925. Springer.
Garc a, V., Mollineda, R. A., and S anchez, J. S. (2009). Index of balanced
accuracy: A performance measure for skewed class distributions. In Pat-
tern Recognition and Image Analysis , pages 441{448. Springer.
Garc a, V., Mollineda, R. A., and S anchez, J. S. (2010). Theoretical analysis
of a performance measure for imbalanced data. In Pattern Recognition
(ICPR), 2010 20th International Conference on , pages 617{620. IEEE.
Granger, C. W. (1999). Outline of forecast theory using generalized cost
functions. Spanish Economic Review , 1(2):161{173.
Han, H., Wang, W.-Y., and Mao, B.-H. (2005). Borderline-smote: A new
over-sampling method in imbalanced data sets learning. In Advances in
intelligent computing , pages 878{887. Springer.
Hand, D. J. (2009). Measuring classier performance: a coherent alternative
to the area under the roc curve. Machine learning , 77(1):103{123.
Hart, P. E. (1968). The condensed nearest neighbor rule. IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory , 14:515{516.
He, H., Bai, Y., Garcia, E. A., and Li, S. (2008). Adasyn: Adaptive
synthetic sampling approach for imbalanced learning. In Neural Net-
works, 2008. IJCNN 2008.(IEEE World Congress on Computational In-
telligence). IEEE International Joint Conference on , pages 1322{1328.
IEEE.
He, H. and Garcia, E. A. (2009). Learning from imbalanced data. Knowledge
and Data Engineering, IEEE Transactions on , 21(9):1263{1284.
38
Hern andez-Orallo, J. (2012). Soft (gaussian cde) regression models and loss
functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1211.1043 .
Hern andez-Orallo, J. (2013). fROCgcurves for regression. Pattern Recog-
nition , 46(12):3395 { 3411.
Hern andez-Orallo, J. (2014). Probabilistic reframing for cost-sensitive re-
gression. ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data , 8(4):17:1{17:55.
Holte, R. C., Acker, L. E., and Porter, B. W. (1989). Concept learning
and the problem of small disjuncts. In IJCAI , volume 89, pages 813{818.
Citeseer.
Hu, J. (2012). Active learning for imbalance problem using l-gem of rbfnn.
InICMLC , pages 490{495.
Hu, S., Liang, Y., Ma, L., and He, Y. (2009). Msmote: improving classica-
tion performance when training data is imbalanced. In Computer Science
and Engineering, 2009. WCSE'09. Second International Workshop on ,
volume 2, pages 13{17. IEEE.
Huang, K., Yang, H., King, I., and Lyu, M. R. (2004). Learning classiers
from imbalanced data based on biased minimax probability machine. In
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2004. CVPR 2004. Proceed-
ings of the 2004 IEEE Computer Society Conference on , volume 2, pages
II{558. IEEE.
Hwang, J. P., Park, S., and Kim, E. (2011). A new weighted approach to
imbalanced data classication problem via support vector machine with
quadratic cost function. Expert Systems with Applications , 38(7):8580{
8585.
Imam, T., Ting, K. M., and Kamruzzaman, J. (2006). z-svm: An svm
for improved classication of imbalanced data. In AI 2006: Advances in
Articial Intelligence , pages 264{273. Springer.
Japkowicz, N. (2000). Learning from imbalanced data sets: a comparison of
various strategies. In AAAI workshop on learning from imbalanced data
sets, volume 68. Menlo Park, CA.
Japkowicz, N. (2001). Concept-learning in the presence of between-class
and within-class imbalances. In Advances in Articial Intelligence , pages
67{77. Springer.
Japkowicz, N. (2003). Class imbalances: are we focusing on the right issue.
InWorkshop on Learning from Imbalanced Data Sets II , volume 1723,
page 63.
39
Japkowicz, N., Myers, C., and Gluck, M. (1995). A novelty detection ap-
proach to classication. In IJCAI , pages 518{523.
Japkowicz, N. and Stephen, S. (2002). The class imbalance problem: A
systematic study. Intelligent data analysis , 6(5):429{449.
Jeatrakul, P., Wong, K. W., and Fung, C. C. (2010). Classication of imbal-
anced data by combining the complementary neural network and smote
algorithm. In Neural Information Processing. Models and Applications ,
pages 152{159. Springer.
Jo, T. and Japkowicz, N. (2004). Class imbalances versus small disjuncts.
ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter , 6(1):40{49.
Joshi, M. V., Kumar, V., and Agarwal, R. C. (2001). Evaluating boosting al-
gorithms to classify rare classes: Comparison and improvements. In Data
Mining, 2001. ICDM 2001, Proceedings IEEE International Conference
on, pages 257{264. IEEE.
Kang, P. and Cho, S. (2006). Eus svms: Ensemble of under-sampled svms
for data imbalance problems. In Neural Information Processing , pages
837{846. Springer.
Kotsiantis, S., Kanellopoulos, D., and Pintelas, P. (2006). Handling imbal-
anced datasets: A review. GESTS International Transactions on Com-
puter Science and Engineering , 30(1):25{36.
Kotsiantis, S. and Pintelas, P. (2003). Mixture of expert agents for handling
imbalanced data sets. Annals of Mathematics, Computing & Teleinfor-
matics , 1(1):46{55.
Kubat, M., Holte, R. C., and Matwin, S. (1998). Machine learning for the
detection of oil spills in satellite radar images. Machine learning , 30(2-
3):195{215.
Kubat, M. and Matwin, S. (1997). Addressing the curse of imbalanced
training sets: One-sided selection. In Proc. of the 14th Int. Conf. on
Machine Learning , pages 179{186. Morgan Kaufmann.
Laurikkala, J. (2001). Improving identication of dicult small classes by
balancing class distribution . Springer.
Lee, H.-j. and Cho, S. (2006). The novelty detection approach for dierent
degrees of class imbalance. In Neural Information Processing , pages 21{30.
Springer.
Lee, S. S. (1999). Regularization in skewed binary classication. Computa-
tional Statistics , 14(2):277.
40
Lee, S. S. (2000). Noisy replication in skewed binary classication. Compu-
tational statistics & data analysis , 34(2):165{191.
Lee, T.-H. (2008). Loss functions in time series forecasting. International
encyclopedia of the social sciences .
Li, C., Jing, C., and Xin-tao, G. (2009). An improved p-svm method used to
deal with imbalanced data sets. In Intelligent Computing and Intelligent
Systems, 2009. ICIS 2009. IEEE International Conference on , volume 1,
pages 118{122. IEEE.
Li, P., Qiao, P.-L., and Liu, Y.-C. (2008). A hybrid re-sampling method for
svm learning from imbalanced data sets. In Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge
Discovery, 2008. FSKD'08. Fifth International Conference on , volume 2,
pages 65{69. IEEE.
Lin, C.-F. and Wang, S.-D. (2002). Fuzzy support vector machines. Neural
Networks, IEEE Transactions on , 13(2):464{471.
Liu, A., Ghosh, J., and Martin, C. E. (2007). Generative oversampling for
mining imbalanced datasets. In DMIN , pages 66{72.
Liu, W., Chawla, S., Cieslak, D. A., and Chawla, N. V. (2010). A robust
decision tree algorithm for imbalanced data sets. In SDM , volume 10,
pages 766{777. SIAM.
Liu, X.-Y., Wu, J., and Zhou, Z.-H. (2009). Exploratory undersampling
for class-imbalance learning. Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B:
Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions on , 39(2):539{550.
Liu, Y., An, A., and Huang, X. (2006). Boosting prediction accuracy on
imbalanced datasets with svm ensembles. In Advances in Knowledge Dis-
covery and Data Mining , pages 107{118. Springer.
Maciejewski, T. and Stefanowski, J. (2011). Local neighbourhood extension
of smote for mining imbalanced data. In Computational Intelligence and
Data Mining (CIDM), 2011 IEEE Symposium on , pages 104{111. IEEE.
Maheshwari, S., Agrawal, J., and Sharma, S. (2011). A new approach for
classication of highly imbalanced datasets using evolutionary algorithms.
Intl. J. Sci. Eng. Res , 2:1{5.
Maloof, M. A. (2003). Learning when data sets are imbalanced and when
costs are unequal and unknown. In ICML-2003 workshop on learning from
imbalanced data sets II , volume 2, pages 2{1.
Manevitz, L. and Yousef, M. (2002). One-class svms for document classi-
cation. the Journal of machine Learning research , 2:139{154.
41
Mani, I. and Zhang, J. (2003). knn approach to unbalanced data distribu-
tions: a case study involving information extraction. In Proceedings of
Workshop on Learning from Imbalanced Datasets .
Mart nez-Garc a, J. M., Su arez-Araujo, C. P., and B aez, P. G. (2012).
Sneom: a sanger network based extended over-sampling method. applica-
tion to imbalanced biomedical datasets. In Neural Information Processing ,
pages 584{592. Springer.
Mease, D., Wyner, A., and Buja, A. (2007). Cost-weighted boosting with
jittering and over/under-sampling: Jous-boost. J. Machine Learning Re-
search , 8:409{439.
Menardi, G. and Torelli, N. (2010). Training and assessing classication
rules with imbalanced data. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery , pages
1{31.
Metz, C. E. (1978). Basic principles of roc analysis. In Seminars in nuclear
medicine , volume 8, pages 283{298. Elsevier.
Mi, Y. (2013). Imbalanced classication based on active learning smote.
Research Journal of Applied Sciences , 5.
Mladenic, D. and Grobelnik, M. (1999). Feature selection for unbalanced
class distribution and naive bayes. In ICML , volume 99, pages 258{267.
Naganjaneyulu, S. and Kuppa, M. R. (2013). A novel framework for class
imbalance learning using intelligent under-sampling. Progress in Articial
Intelligence , 2(1):73{84.
Nakamura, M., Kajiwara, Y., Otsuka, A., and Kimura, H. (2013).
Lvq-smote{learning vector quantization based synthetic minority over{
sampling technique for biomedical data. BioData mining , 6(1):16.
Napiera la, K., Stefanowski, J., and Wilk, S. (2010). Learning from imbal-
anced data in presence of noisy and borderline examples. In Rough Sets
and Current Trends in Computing , pages 158{167. Springer.
Oh, S.-H. (2011). Error back-propagation algorithm for classication of
imbalanced data. Neurocomputing , 74(6):1058{1061.
Pearson, R., Goney, G., and Shwaber, J. (2003). Imbalanced clustering for
microarray time-series. In Proceedings of the ICML , volume 3.
Phua, C., Alahakoon, D., and Lee, V. (2004). Minority report in fraud detec-
tion: classication of skewed data. ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newslet-
ter, 6(1):50{59.
42
Prati, R. C., Batista, G. E., and Monard, M. C. (2004a). Class imbalances
versus class overlapping: an analysis of a learning system behavior. In
MICAI 2004: Advances in Articial Intelligence , pages 312{321. Springer.
Prati, R. C., Batista, G. E., and Monard, M. C. (2004b). Learning with
class skews and small disjuncts. In Advances in Articial Intelligence{
SBIA 2004 , pages 296{306. Springer.
Provost, F. J. and Fawcett, T. (1997). Analysis and visualization of classier
performance: Comparison under imprecise class and cost distributions. In
KDD , volume 97, pages 43{48.
Provost, F. J., Fawcett, T., and Kohavi, R. (1998). The case against accu-
racy estimation for comparing induction algorithms. In ICML'98: Proc.
of the 15th Int. Conf. on Machine Learning , pages 445{453. Morgan Kauf-
mann Publishers.
Ramentol, E., Caballero, Y., Bello, R., and Herrera, F. (2012a). Smote-rsb*:
a hybrid preprocessing approach based on oversampling and undersam-
pling for high imbalanced data-sets using smote and rough sets theory.
Knowledge and Information Systems , 33(2):245{265.
Ramentol, E., Verbiest, N., Bello, R., Caballero, Y., Cornelis, C., and Her-
rera, F. (2012b). Smote-frst: a new resampling method using fuzzy rough
set theory. In 10th International FLINS conference on uncertainty mod-
elling in knowledge engineering and decision making (to appear) .
Ranawana, R. and Palade, V. (2006). Optimized precision-a new measure
for classier performance evaluation. In Evolutionary Computation, 2006.
CEC 2006. IEEE Congress on , pages 2254{2261. IEEE.
Raskutti, B. and Kowalczyk, A. (2004). Extreme re-balancing for svms: a
case study. ACM Sigkdd Explorations Newsletter , 6(1):60{69.
Ribeiro, R. P. (2011). Utility-based Regression . PhD thesis, Dep. Computer
Science, Faculty of Sciences - University of Porto.
Ribeiro, R. P. and Torgo, L. (2003). Predicting harmful algae blooms. In
Progress in Articial Intelligence , pages 308{312. Springer.
Rijsbergen, C. V. (1979). Information retrieval. dept. of computer science,
university of glasgow, 2nd edition.
Rodr guez, J. J., D ez-Pastor, J.-F., Maudes, J., and Garc a-Osorio, C.
(2012). Disturbing neighbors ensembles of trees for imbalanced data. In
Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), 2012 11th International
Conference on , volume 2, pages 83{88. IEEE.
43
Sch olkopf, B., Platt, J. C., Shawe-Taylor, J., Smola, A. J., and Williamson,
R. C. (2001). Estimating the support of a high-dimensional distribution.
Neural computation , 13(7):1443{1471.
Seiert, C., Khoshgoftaar, T. M., Van Hulse, J., and Folleco, A. (2011). An
empirical study of the classication performance of learners on imbalanced
and noisy software quality data. Information Sciences .
Seiert, C., Khoshgoftaar, T. M., Van Hulse, J., and Napolitano, A. (2010).
Rusboost: A hybrid approach to alleviating class imbalance. Systems,
Man and Cybernetics, Part A: Systems and Humans, IEEE Transactions
on, 40(1):185{197.
Sinha, A. P. and May, J. H. (2004). Evaluating and tuning predictive data
mining models using receiver operating characteristic curves. Journal of
Management Information Systems , 21(3):249{280.
Song, J., Lu, X., and Wu, X. (2009). An improved adaboost algorithm for
unbalanced classication data. In Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge Discov-
ery, 2009. FSKD'09. Sixth International Conference on , volume 1, pages
109{113. IEEE.
Songwattanasiri, P. and Sinapiromsaran, K. (2010). Smoute: Synthetics
minority over-sampling and under-sampling techniques for class imbal-
anced problem. In Proceedings of the Annual International Conference on
Computer Science Education: Innovation and Technology, Special Track:
Knowledge Discovery , pages 78{83.
Stefanowski, J. and Wilk, S. (2007). Improving rule based classiers induced
by modlem by selective pre-processing of imbalanced data. In Proc. of the
RSKD Workshop at ECML/PKDD, Warsaw , pages 54{65.
Stefanowski, J. and Wilk, S. (2008). Selective pre-processing of imbalanced
data for improving classication performance. In Data Warehousing and
Knowledge Discovery , pages 283{292. Springer.
Sun, Y., Kamel, M. S., Wong, A. K., and Wang, Y. (2007). Cost-
sensitive boosting for classication of imbalanced data. Pattern Recog-
nition , 40(12):3358{3378.
Sun, Y., Wong, A. K., and Kamel, M. S. (2009). Classication of imbal-
anced data: A review. International Journal of Pattern Recognition and
Articial Intelligence , 23(04):687{719.
Tan, A., Gilbert, D., and Deville, Y. (2003). Multi-class protein fold classi-
cation using a new ensemble machine learning approach.
44
Tang, Y. and Zhang, Y.-Q. (2006). Granular svm with repetitive under-
sampling for highly imbalanced protein homology prediction. In Granu-
lar Computing, 2006 IEEE International Conference on , pages 457{460.
IEEE.
Tang, Y., Zhang, Y.-Q., Chawla, N. V., and Krasser, S. (2009). Svms mod-
eling for highly imbalanced classication. Systems, Man, and Cybernetics,
Part B: Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions on , 39(1):281{288.
Tao, D., Tang, X., Li, X., and Wu, X. (2006). Asymmetric bagging and ran-
dom subspace for support vector machines-based relevance feedback in
image retrieval. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Trans-
actions on , 28(7):1088{1099.
Thai-Nghe, N., Gantner, Z., and Schmidt-Thieme, L. (2011). A new eval-
uation measure for learning from imbalanced data. In Neural Networks
(IJCNN), The 2011 International Joint Conference on , pages 537{542.
IEEE.
Tomek, I. (1976). Two modications of cnn. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cy-
bern. , (11):769{772.
Torgo, L. (2005). Regression error characteristic surfaces. In KDD'05: Proc.
of the 11th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining , pages 697{702. ACM Press.
Torgo, L. and Ribeiro, R. P. (2003). Predicting outliers. In Knowledge
Discovery in Databases: PKDD 2003 , pages 447{458. Springer.
Torgo, L. and Ribeiro, R. P. (2007). Utility-based regression. In PKDD'07:
Proc. of 11th European Conf. on Principles and Practice of Knowledge
Discovery in Databases , pages 597{604. Springer.
Torgo, L. and Ribeiro, R. P. (2009). Precision and recall in regression. In
DS'09: 12th Int. Conf. on Discovery Science , pages 332{346. Springer.
Torgo, L., Ribeiro, R. P., Pfahringer, B., and Branco, P. (2013). Smote for
regression. In Progress in Articial Intelligence , pages 378{389. Springer.
Van Der Putten, P. and Van Someren, M. (2004). A bias-variance analysis of
a real world learning problem: The coil challenge 2000. Machine Learning ,
57(1-2):177{195.
Vasu, M. and Ravi, V. (2011). A hybrid under-sampling approach for mining
unbalanced datasets: applications to banking and insurance. International
Journal of Data Mining, Modelling and Management , 3(1):75{105.
45
Verbiest, N., Ramentol, E., Cornelis, C., and Herrera, F. (2012). Improving
smote with fuzzy rough prototype selection to detect noise in imbalanced
classication data. In Advances in Articial Intelligence{IBERAMIA
2012, pages 169{178. Springer.
Veropoulos, K., Campbell, C., and Cristianini, N. (1999). Controlling the
sensitivity of support vector machines. In Proceedings of the international
joint conference on articial intelligence , volume 1999, pages 55{60. Cite-
seer.
Wang, B. X. and Japkowicz, N. (2010). Boosting support vector machines
for imbalanced data sets. Knowledge and information systems , 25(1):1{20.
Wang, H.-Y. (2008). Combination approach of smote and biased-svm for im-
balanced datasets. In Neural Networks, 2008. IJCNN 2008.(IEEE World
Congress on Computational Intelligence). IEEE International Joint Con-
ference on , pages 228{231. IEEE.
Wang, S. and Yao, X. (2009). Diversity analysis on imbalanced data sets by
using ensemble models. In Computational Intelligence and Data Mining,
2009. CIDM'09. IEEE Symposium on , pages 324{331. IEEE.
Wasikowski, M. and Chen, X.-w. (2010). Combating the small sample class
imbalance problem using feature selection. Knowledge and Data Engi-
neering, IEEE Transactions on , 22(10):1388{1400.
Weiguo, D., Li, W., Yiyang, W., and Zhong, Q. (2012). An improved svm-
km model for imbalanced datasets. In Industrial Control and Electronics
Engineering (ICICEE), 2012 International Conference on , pages 100{103.
IEEE.
Weiss, G. M. (2004). Mining with rarity: a unifying framework. SIGKDD
Explorations Newsletter , 6(1):7{19.
Weiss, G. M. (2005). Mining with rare cases. In Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery Handbook , pages 765{776. Springer.
Weiss, G. M. (2010). The impact of small disjuncts on classier learning. In
Data Mining , pages 193{226. Springer.
Weiss, G. M. and Hirsh, H. (2000). A quantitative study of small disjuncts.
InAAAI/IAAI , pages 665{670.
Weiss, G. M. and Provost, F. J. (2003). Learning when training data are
costly: the eect of class distribution on tree induction. J. Artif. Intell.
Res.(JAIR) , 19:315{354.
46
Wu, G. and Chang, E. Y. (2003). Class-boundary alignment for imbalanced
dataset learning. In ICML 2003 workshop on learning from imbalanced
data sets II, Washington, DC , pages 49{56.
Wu, G. and Chang, E. Y. (2005). Kba: Kernel boundary alignment con-
sidering imbalanced data distribution. Knowledge and Data Engineering,
IEEE Transactions on , 17(6):786{795.
Xiao, J., Xie, L., He, C., and Jiang, X. (2012). Dynamic classier ensem-
ble model for customer classication with imbalanced class distribution.
Expert Systems with Applications , 39(3):3668{3675.
Xuan, L., Zhigang, C., and Fan, Y. (2013). Exploring of clustering algorithm
on class-imbalanced data. In Computer Science & Education (ICCSE),
2013 8th International Conference on , pages 89{93. IEEE.
Yang, Z. and Gao, D. (2012). An active under-sampling approach for im-
balanced data classication. In Computational Intelligence and Design
(ISCID), 2012 Fifth International Symposium on , volume 2, pages 270{
273. IEEE.
Yen, S.-J. and Lee, Y.-S. (2006). Under-sampling approaches for improving
prediction of the minority class in an imbalanced dataset. In Intelligent
Control and Automation , pages 731{740. Springer.
Yen, S.-J. and Lee, Y.-S. (2009). Cluster-based under-sampling approaches
for imbalanced data distributions. Expert Systems with Applications ,
36(3):5718{5727.
Yong, Y. (2012). The research of imbalanced data set of sample sampling
method based on k-means cluster and genetic algorithm. Energy Procedia ,
17:164{170.
Yoon, K. and Kwek, S. (2005). An unsupervised learning approach to
resolving the data imbalanced issue in supervised learning problems in
functional genomics. In Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 2005. HIS'05. Fifth
International Conference on , pages 6{pp. IEEE.
Yuanhong, D., Hongchang, C., and Tao, P. (2009). Cost-sensitive support
vector machine based on weighted attribute. In Information Technology
and Applications, 2009. IFITA'09. International Forum on , volume 1,
pages 690{692. IEEE.
Zadrozny, B., Langford, J., and Abe, N. (2003). Cost-sensitive learning
by cost-proportionate example weighting. In Data Mining, 2003. ICDM
2003. Third IEEE International Conference on , pages 435{442. IEEE.
47
Zellner, A. (1986). Bayesian estimation and prediction using asymmetric loss
functions. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 81(394):446{
451.
Zhang, D., Liu, W., Gong, X., and Jin, H. (2011). A novel improved smote
resampling algorithm based on fractal. Journal of Computational Infor-
mation Systems , 7(6):2204{2211.
Zhao, H., Sinha, A. P., and Bansal, G. (2011). An extended tuning method
for cost-sensitive regression and forecasting. Decision Support Systems ,
51(3):372{383.
Zheng, Z., Wu, X., and Srihari, R. (2004). Feature selection for text cate-
gorization on imbalanced data. ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter ,
6(1):80{89.
Zhou, Z.-H. and Liu, X.-Y. (2006). Training cost-sensitive neural networks
with methods addressing the class imbalance problem. Knowledge and
Data Engineering, IEEE Transactions on , 18(1):63{77.
Zhu, J. and Hovy, E. H. (2007). Active learning for word sense disam-
biguation with methods for addressing the class imbalance problem. In
EMNLP-CoNLL , volume 7, pages 783{790.
Zhuang, L. and Dai, H. (2006a). Parameter estimation of one-class svm on
imbalance text classication. In Advances in Articial Intelligence , pages
538{549. Springer.
Zhuang, L. and Dai, H. (2006b). Parameter optimization of kernel-based
one-class classier on imbalance learning. Journal of Computers , 1(7):32{
40.
48
