A systematic analysis of performance measures for classiﬁcation tasks
Marina Sokolovaa,*, Guy Lapalmeb
aElectronic Health Information Lab, Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, Canada
bDépartement d’informatique et de recherche opérationnelle Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada
article info
Article history:
Received 14 February 2008Received in revised form 21 November 2008Accepted 6 March 2009
Available online 8 May 2009
Keywords:
Performance evaluation
Machine LearningText classiﬁcationabstract
This paper presents a systematic analysis of twenty four performance measures used in the
complete spectrum of Machine Learning classiﬁcation tasks, i.e., binary, multi-class,
multi-labelled, and hierarchical. For each classiﬁcation task, the study relates a set of
changes in a confusion matrix to speciﬁc characteristics of data. Then the analysis concen-trates on the type of changes to a confusion matrix that do not change a measure, therefore,
preserve a classiﬁer’s evaluation ( measure invariance ). The result is the measure invariance
taxonomy with respect to all relevant label distribution changes in a classiﬁcation problem.
This formal analysis is supported by examples of applications where invariance properties
of measures lead to a more reliable evaluation of classiﬁers. Text classiﬁcation supplements
the discussion with several case studies.
/C2112009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Motivation
Machine Learning (ML) divides classiﬁcation onto binary, multi-class, multi-labelled, and hierarchical tasks. In this work we
present a systematic analysis of twenty four performance measures used in these classiﬁcation subﬁelds. We focus on how well
classes are identiﬁed without reference to computation cost or time. We consider a set of changes in a confusion matrix that
correspond to speciﬁc characteristics of data. We then analyze the type of changes that do not change a measure’s value and
therefore preserve a classiﬁer’s evaluation. This is what we call measure invariance . As a result, we build the measure invariance
taxonomy with respect to all relevant label distribution changes in a classiﬁcation problem. We supplement the formal analysisby examples of applications where invariance properties of measures lead to a more reliable evaluation of classiﬁers; examples
are taken from text classiﬁcation. Note, that we focus on recent ML developments; more details on ML measures can be found,
for example, in Sokolova, Japkowicz, and Szpakowicz (2006) which looks into relations between the measures and assessment
of medical trials. To the best of our knowledge, our current study is the ﬁrst reviews of ML measures which comprehensivelyevaluates the invariant properties of measures. Preliminary results on binary classiﬁcation appear in ( Sokolova & Lapalme,
2007 ). This study expands the results two-fold, with discussion of new invariant properties, in some cases, adding monotonicity
properties, and consideration of multi-class, multi-labelled, and hierarchical measures.
Empirical evaluation remains the most used approach for the algorithm assessment, although ML algorithms can be eval-
uated through empirical assessment or theory or both, e.g., derived generalized bounds and empirical results ( Marchand &
Shawe-Taylor, 2002 ). Evaluation techniques based on multiple experiments are considered in Dietterich (1998) , one of the
most cited work on empirical evaluation of ML algorithms. An extensive critique of ML evaluation practice can be found in
Salzberg (1999) . The author analyzes the currently used methods and their statistical validity. The paper distinguishes two
goals of evaluation: a comparison of algorithms, and the feasibility of algorithms on a speciﬁc domain. Demsar (2006) sur-
veys how classiﬁers are compared over multiple data sets. Empirical comparison is most often done by applying algorithms
on various data sets and then evaluating the performance of the classiﬁers that the algorithms have produced; accuracy
0306-4573/$ - see front matter /C2112009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.ipm.2009.03.002*Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: msokolova@ehealthinformation.ca (M. Sokolova), lapalme@iro.umontreal.ca (G. Lapalme).Information Processing and Management 45 (2009) 427–437
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Information Processing and Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/infoproman

being the most often used measure. In all these assessment approaches, the algorithm and the output classiﬁers take the
central stage.
We take an alternative route looking how characteristics affect the objectivity of measures. Our formal discussion of ML
performance measures complements popular statistical and empirical comparisons such as the ones presented in Goutte and
Gaussier (2005) . We show that, in some learning settings, the correct identiﬁcation of positive examples may be important
whereas in others, the correct identiﬁcation of negative examples or disagreement between data and classiﬁer labels may be
more signiﬁcant. Thus, standard performance measures should be re-evaluated with respect to those scenarios. Previously,
ML studies of performance measures have primarily focused on binary classiﬁcation. For a complete review, we add multi-
class, multi-topic and hierarchical classiﬁcation measures. The current study can be useful for measure design. So far, the ML
community did not consider measures’ invariance when new ones were introduced (Bengio, Mariéthoz, & Keller, 2005;
Huang & Ling, 2007 ) or suggested for adoption from other disciplines (Sokolova et al., 2006 ).
2. Overview of classiﬁcation tasks
Supervised ML allows access to the data labels during the algorithm’s training and testing stages. Consider categorical
labels when data entries x1;...;xnhave to be assigned into predeﬁned classes C1;...;Cl. Then classiﬁcation falls into one
of the following tasks:
Binary : the input is to be classiﬁed into one, and only one, of two non-overlapping classes ðC1;C2Þ; Binary classiﬁcation is
the most popular classiﬁcation task. Assigned categories can be objective, independent of manual evaluation (e.g, repub-lican or democrat in the votes data of the UCI repository (Asuncion & Newman, 2007 )) or subjective, dependent on man-
ual evaluation (e.g., positive or negative reviews in Amazon.com (Blitzer et al., 2007 )). Classes can be well-deﬁned (e.g.,
the votes labels), ambiguous (e.g., the review opinion labels), or both (e.g., medical vs. other texts in the Newsgroups
collection
1).
Multi-class : the input is to be classiﬁed into one, and only one, of lnon-overlapping classes. Multiclass problems include
the identiﬁcation of the iris type in a three-class data set popular in pattern recognition (Duda & Hart, 1973 ), in the learn-
ing the original 135 categories in the benchmark Reuters collection,2or in tagging utterances as objective, subjective, or
neutral ( Wilson, Wiebe, & Hwa, 2006 ). As for the binary case, multi-class categorization can be objective or subjective,
well-deﬁned or ambiguous.
Multi-labelled : the input is to be classiﬁed into several of lnon-overlapping Cj. Examples include classiﬁcation of func-
tions of yeast genes ( Mewes, Albermann, Heumann, Lieb, & Pfeiffer, 1997 ), identifying scenes from image data (Li, Zhang,
& Zhu, 2006 ) or text-database alignment and word alignment in machine translation (Snyder & Barzilay, 2007 ). In text
mining of medical information, multi-label classiﬁcation methods are often evaluated on OHSUMED, a collection of
medical references ( Hersh, Buckley, Leone, & Hickam, 1997 ). When the learning task is document topic classiﬁcation,
multi-labelling is often referred as multi-topic classiﬁcation such as for clinical texts that are assigned multiple diseasecodes from ICD-9-CM ( Sasaki, Rea, & Ananiadou, 2007 ). Binary, multi-class, and multi-labelled problems form ﬂat
classiﬁcation ( Yang, 1999 ), in which categories are isolated and their relations are not considered important. The next,
hierarchical, problem addresses relations among categories and includes their structure into learning targets.
Hierarchical : the input is to be classiﬁed into one, and only one, C
jwhich are be divided into subclasses or grouped into
superclasses. The hierarchy is deﬁned and cannot be changed during classiﬁcation. Text classiﬁcation and bioinformaticssupply many examples, e.g., protein function prediction (Eisner, Poulin, Szafron, Lu, & Greiner, 2005 ). Hierarchical
classiﬁcation can be transformed into ﬂat classiﬁcation. For example, the Reuters collection classiﬁcation can be multi-class ( Bobicev & Sokolova, 2008 ), multi-labelled (Tikk & Biró, 2003 ), and hierarchical (Sun, Lim, & Ng, 2003 ).
A frequent appearance of language and text problems among the listed above examples can be explained by a special role
Natural Language Processing (NLP) holds in ML applications. The richness of language characteristics and the fast-increasing
volume of readily available digital texts make texts not only a nearly inexhaustible research area, but also one of the most
important data formats for ML applications ( Shawe-Taylor & Christianini, 2004 ). Text Classiﬁcation has achieved a promi-
nent place among ML applications to NLP problems. It is dedicated to ﬁnding texts according to a given criteria (Sebastiani,
2002 ) and it includes the classiﬁcation of documents (research papers, technical reports, magazine articles, etc.). For topic
classiﬁcation (e.g., identiﬁcation of documents about a given city or documents about bands and artists, etc.) documentsare simply classiﬁed as being relevant to the topic or not; hence, classes are built as positive vs ‘‘everything else”. Retrieval
of relevant documents being the more important task, the focus in this case is on true positive classiﬁcation. First compre-
hensive books on Machine Learning were published in late 1990’s (Langley, 1996; Mitchell, 1997 ). As a discipline, ML bor-
rowed measures from assortment of disciplines traditionally relied on empirical evidence, e.g., medical trials ( Isselbacher &
Braunwald, 1994 ), behavioural research ( Cohen, 1988 ), information retrieval (IR) ( van Rijsbergen, 1979; Salton & McGill,
1983 ). In some ways, text classiﬁcation borrows from Information Extraction (IE) which preluded the use of Machine
1http://kdd.ics.uci.edu/databases/20newsgroups/20newsgroups.html .
2http://www.daviddlewis.com/resources/testcollections/reuters21578 .428 M. Sokolova, G. Lapalme / Information Processing and Management 45 (2009) 427–437
Learning in automated text processing and understanding, e.g., the automated analysis and generation of synonymous texts
(Boyer & Lapalme, 1985). IE and IR metrics in the evaluation of ML algorithms are an example of such borrowing. The
evaluation metrics commonly used in Text Classiﬁcation (Precision ,Recall ,Fscore ) have their origin in IE. The formulas for
these measures neglect the correct classiﬁcation of negative examples, they instead reﬂect the importance of retrieval ofpositive examples in text/document classiﬁcation:
Precision : the number of correctly classiﬁed positive examples divided by the number of examples labeled by the system
as positiveRecall : the number of correctly classiﬁed positive examples divided by the number of positive examples in the data
Fscore : a combination of the above.
In recent years, the NLP and ML communities have turned their attention to the study of opinions, subjective statements,
and sentiments. The corresponding empirical problems are represented by the classiﬁcation of political debates, web post-ings or phone calls in which the main task is non-topic classiﬁcation, e.g. vote classiﬁcation, gender classiﬁcation, sentiment
classiﬁcation, etc. Data for these studies are gathered from chart-boards, blogs, product and movie reviews, email, records of
phone conversations and political debates, electronic negotiation transcripts, etc. Chart-boards, blogs and movie reviews are
often used in sentiment analysis to ﬁnd whether texts reﬂect a positive or negative opinion of the author on certain products
or events. In this case, texts are classiﬁed according to opinion/sentiment labels (Pang, Lee, & Vaithyanathan, 2002 ). Email
discussions, records of phone conversation and electronic negotiation transcripts are used in studies of individual behavior.The aim of such studies is to ﬁnd what factors inﬂuence the behavior of a person in a speciﬁc situation. Classiﬁcation of texts
depends on the problem statement. Transcripts of the US Congress debates are used in the social network analysis, a newarea of Artiﬁcial Intelligence research. Here a common task is to deﬁne important inﬂuence factors and predict the future
behavior of members of a social group. In this case, records are classiﬁed according to the actions of speakers ( Thomas, Pang,
& Lee, 2006 ).
These sources represent records of human communication that convey meanings sent by a speaker and received by a
hearer. These meanings can be complex and subtly expressed and constituted from both what is said and what is implied.So far, there is no common consensus on the choice of measures used to evaluate the performance of classiﬁers in opinion,
subjectivity and sentiment analysis. Additional performance measures other than the above are Accuracy used in Pang et al.
(2002) and Thomas et al. (2006), or the correspondence between Precision and Recall inGamon, Aue, Corston-Oliver, and
Ringger (2005) . When going from document classiﬁcation to the classiﬁcation of human communication, it is important
to know how different performance measures relate to each other in order to help resolve disagreements among perfor-mance evaluations. This phenomenon happens quite often in experimental studies.
3. Performance measures for classiﬁcation
The correctness of a classiﬁcation can be evaluated by computing the number of correctly recognized class examples
(true positives), the number of correctly recognized examples that do not belong to the class (true negatives), and exam-
ples that either were incorrectly assigned to the class (false positives) or that were not recognized as class examples
(false negatives). These four counts constitute a confusion matrix shown in Table 1 for the case of the binary
classiﬁcation .
Table 2 presents the most often used measures for binary classiﬁcation based on the values of the confusion matrix. AUC
(Area Under the Curve ),
3captures a single point on the Reception Operating Characteristic curve; it can also be viewed as a linear
transformation of Youden Index (Youden, 1950 ). We omit measures such as BreakEvenPoint , the point at which Precision =Recall
(Goutte & Gaussier, 2005 ), and the combinedAUC
Accuracy(Huang & Ling, 2007 ) because their properties can be derived from the basic
measures. However, we present Fscore ’s properties because of its extensive use in text classiﬁcation.
Table 3 presents the measures for multi-class classiﬁcation . For an individual class Ci, the assessment is deﬁned by
tpi;fni;tni;fpi:Accuracyi;Precision i;Recall iare calculated from the counts for Ci. Quality of the overall classiﬁcation is usuallyTable 1
Confusion matrix for binary classiﬁcation and the corresponding array representation used in this paper.
3AUC, sometimes referred to as Balanced Accuracy .M. Sokolova, G. Lapalme / Information Processing and Management 45 (2009) 427–437 429
assessed in two ways: a measure is the average of the same measures calculated for C1;...;Cl(macro-averaging shown with
anMindex), or the sum of counts to obtain cumulative tp;fn;tn;fpand then calculating a performance measure (micro-aver-
aging shown with lindices). Macro-averaging treats all classes equally while micro-averaging favors bigger classes. As there
is yet no well-developed multi-class Reception Operating Characteristic analysis ( Lachiche & Flach, 2003 ), we do not include
AUC in the list of multi-classiﬁcation measures.
The quality of multi-topic classiﬁcation (Table 4 ) is assessed through either partial or complete class label matching
(Kazawa, Izumitani, Taira, & Maeda, 2005 ); the latter is often referred to as exact matching. We consider all classes and their
labels as being equivalent. These measures thus count correct or incorrect label identiﬁcation independently of their order or
rank. We do not include such measures as One-error which counts how many times the top-ranked label was not a member
of the predicted label set (Li et al., 2006 ). Some authors refer to it Exact Match Ratio as Accuracy (Zhu, Ji, Xu, & Gong, 2005 ). In
Section 4, we show that these two measures are not interchangeable with respect to confusion matrix transformations; thus,
they may not be equally applicable to similar settings.
Forhierarchical classiﬁcation measures (Table 5 ), we consider measures that incorporate the problem’s hierarchy. These
measures either evaluate descendant or ancestor performance (Kiritchenko, Matwin, Nock, & Famili, 2006 ). We omitTable 2
Measures for binary classiﬁcation using the notation of Table 1 .
Measure Formula Evaluation focus
Accuracytpþtn
tpþfnþfpþtnOverall effectiveness of a classiﬁer
Precisiontp
tpþfpClass agreement of the data labels with the positive labels given by the classiﬁer
Recall (Sensitivity)tp
tpþfnEffectiveness of a classiﬁer to identify positive labels
Fscoreðb2þ1Þtp
ðb2þ1Þtpþb2fnþfpRelations between data’s positive labels and those given by a classiﬁer
Speciﬁcitytn
fpþtnHow effectively a classiﬁer identiﬁes negative labels
AUC1
2tp
tpþfnþtn
tnþfp/C16/C17
Classiﬁer’s ability to avoid false classiﬁcation
Table 3
Measures for multi-class classiﬁcation based on a generalization of the measures of Table 1 for many classes Ci:tpiare true positive for Ci, and fpi– false
positive, fni– false negative, and tni– true negative counts respectively. land Mindices represent micro- and macro-averaging.
Measure Formula Evaluation focus
Average AccuracyPl
i¼1tpiþtni
tpiþfniþfpiþtni
lThe average per-class effectiveness of a classiﬁer
Error RatePl
i¼1fpiþfni
tpiþfniþfpiþtni
lThe average per-class classiﬁcation error
Precision lPl
i¼1tpiPl
i¼1ðtpiþfpiÞAgreement of the data class labels with those of a classiﬁers if calculated from sums of per-text decisions
Recall lPl
i¼1tpiPli¼1ðtpiþfniÞEffectiveness of a classiﬁer to identify class labels if calculated from sums of per-text decisions
Fscore lðb2þ1ÞPrecision lRecall l
b2Precision lþRecall lRelations between data’s positive labels and those given by a classiﬁer based on sums of per-text decisions
Precision MPl
i¼1tpi
tpiþfpi
lAn average per-class agreement of the data class labels with those of a classiﬁers
Recall MPl
i¼1tpi
tpiþfni
lAn average per-class effectiveness of a classiﬁer to identify class labels
Fscore Mðb2þ1ÞPrecision MRecall M
b2Precision MþRecall MRelations between data’s positive labels and those given by a classiﬁer based on a per-class average
Table 4
Measures for multi-topic classiﬁcation; Iis the indicator function; Li¼Li½1/C138;...;Li½l/C138denotes a set of class labels for xi;Li½j/C138¼1i fCjis present among the labels
and 0, otherwise; Lc
iare labels given by a classiﬁer, Ldiare the data labels.
Measure Formula Evaluation focus
Exact Match RatioPn
i¼1IðLd
i¼LdiÞ
nThe average per-text exact classiﬁcation
Labelling FscorePn
i¼12Pl
j¼1Lc
i½j/C138Ldi½j/C138
Pl
j¼1ðLc
i½j/C138þLdi½j/C138Þ
nThe average per-text classiﬁcation with partial matches
Retrieval FscorePl
j¼12Pni¼1Lc
i½j/C138Ldi½j/C138
Pn
i¼1ðLc
i½j/C138þLdi½j/C138Þ
lThe average per-class classiﬁcation with partial matches
Hamming LossPn
i¼1Plj¼1IðLc
i½j/C138–Ldi½j/C138Þ
nlThe average per-example per-class total error430 M. Sokolova, G. Lapalme / Information Processing and Management 45 (2009) 427–437
distance- and semantics-based measures suggested for hierarchical classiﬁcation (Blockeel, Bruynooghe, Dzeroski, Ramon, &
Struyf, 2002; Sun et al., 2003 ). These measures extend ﬂat, non-hierarchical, measures by estimating differences and simi-
larities between classes. However, in these measures, acceptable differences and similarities are often speciﬁed by users(Costa, Lorena, Carvalho, & Freitas, 2007 ). Thus, the obtained results may be subjective and user-speciﬁc. A similar restriction
applies to depth-dependent measures, which relate classes by imposing vertical distances ( Blockeel et al., 2002 ).
Data Mining has successfully exploited the invariant properties of interestingness measures for comparison of association
and classiﬁcation rules ( Tan, Kumar, & Srivastava, 2004 ). Some invariant properties of binary classiﬁcation measures have
been discussed within broader studies of the classiﬁcation of communication records ( Sokolova & Lapalme, 2007 ). In the cur-
rent study, we consider new invariant properties and expand discussed measures by including multi-class, multi-topic andhierarchical classiﬁcation measures. Although the latter three types of classiﬁcation are quite popular, their measures have
not been studied to the same extent as for binary classiﬁcation measures.
4. Invariance properties of measures
We focus on the ability of a measure to preserve its value under a change in the confusion matrix. A measure is invariant if
its value does not change when a confusion matrix changes, i.e. invariance indicates that the measure does not detect the
change in the confusion matrix. This inability can be beneﬁcial or adverse, depending on the goals.
Let’s consider a case when invariance to the change of tnis beneﬁcial. Text classiﬁcation extensively uses Precision and
Recall (Sensitivity ) which do not detect changes in tnwhen all other matrix entries remain the same. In document classiﬁca-
tion, a large number of unrelated documents constitute a negative class without having a single unifying characteristic. Thecriterion for the performance of a classiﬁer is its performance on relevant documents, a well-deﬁned unimodal positive class,
independently of performance on the irrelevant documents. Precision and Recall do not depend on tn, but only on the correct
labelling of positive examples ðtpÞand the incorrect labelling of examples (fp and fn). These measures provide the best per-
spective on a classiﬁer’s performance for document classiﬁcation.
On contrast, the same invariance for the tnchange can be an adversary. Consider the classiﬁcation of human communi-
cation where negative classes are also important. In those problems, classes often have distinct features (male or female) for
which both positive and negative classes are well-deﬁned. The retrieval of a positive class, the discrimination between clas-
ses or the balance between retrieval from both classes are problem-dependent tasks. Thus, an appropriate evaluation mea-sure should take into account the classiﬁcation of negative examples and reﬂect the changes in tnwhen the other matrix
elements stay the same.
We now examine eight invariance properties ðI
16k68Þwith respect to changes of elements in a confusion matrix. All the
eight changes are results of elementary operations on matrices: addition, scalar multiplication, interchange of rows or col-umns. This set covers all relevant label distribution changes in a classiﬁcation problem: interchange of positive and negative
labels provided by data, interchange of those labels output by a classiﬁer, change of a single segment (e.g., true positives), a
uniform increase in the number of examples. Henceforth,
Ikdenotes the non-invariance of a transformation. We in detail
discuss binary classiﬁcation because other evaluation measures are derived from the binary confusion matrix and its perfor-mance measures. In several parts of the discussion, we refer to data quality. By this we understand how well examples rep-
resent the underlying notion (especially, ease of understanding and interpretability), how accurate is the data, including its
labels, and the amount of noise (based on Wang & Strong (1996) ). Thereinafter, fð½tp;fp;tn;fn/C138Þdenotes a measure’s value.
Our claim is that the following invariance properties affect the applicability and trustworthiness of a measure.
4.1. ðI
1ÞExchange of positives and negatives
A measure f([tp;fp;tn;fn]) is invariant under exchange of positives and negatives if f([tp;fp;tn;fn]) =f([tn;fp;tp;fn]).
tp fn
fp tn/C20/C21
!tn fp
fn tp/C20/C21Table 5
Measures for hierarchical classiﬁcation: C#means subclasses of class C;Cc
#denotes subclasses assigned by a classiﬁer; Cd#– data class labels; similar notations
apply to superclasses, which are denoted by C".
Measure Formula Evaluation focus
Precision #jCc
#\Cd#j
jCc
#jPositive agreement on subclass labels w.r.t. the subclass labels given by a classiﬁer
Recall #jCc
#\Cd#j
jCd#jPositive agreement on subclass labels w.r.t. the subclass labels given by data
Fscore #ðb2þ1ÞPrecision #Recall #
b2Precision #þRecall #Relations between data’s positive subclass labels and those given by a classiﬁer
Precision "jCc"\Cd"j
jCc"jPositive agreement on superclass labels w.r.t. the superclass labels given by a classiﬁer
Recall "jCc"\Cd"j
jCd
"jPositive agreement on superclass labels w.r.t. the superclass labels given by data
Fscore "ðb2þ1ÞPrecision "Precision "
b2Precision "þPrecision "Relations between data’s positive superclass labels and those given by a classiﬁerM. Sokolova, G. Lapalme / Information Processing and Management 45 (2009) 427–437 431
This shows measure invariance with respect to the distribution of classiﬁcation results because it does not distin-
guish tpfrom tnand fnfrom fpand may not recognize the asymmetry of classiﬁcation results. Thus it may not be trust-
worthy when classiﬁers are compared on data sets with different and/or unbalanced class distributions. For example,
invariant measures may be more appropriate for assessing the classiﬁcation of consumer reviews than for document
classiﬁcation.
4.2. ðI2ÞChange of true negative counts
A measure f([tp;fp;tn;fn]) is invariant under the change of tnif all other matrix counts remain the same f([tp;fp;tn;
fn]) =f([tp;fp;tn0;fn]).
tp fn
fp tn/C20/C21
!tp fn
fp tn0/C20/C21
This measure does not recognize the specifying ability of classiﬁers. Such evaluation may be more applicable to domains
with a multi-modal negative class taken as ‘‘everything not positive”. In the case of text classiﬁcation, these invariant mea-
sures are suitable for the evaluation of document classiﬁcation. If the measure is non-invariant, then it acknowledges the
ability of classiﬁers to correctly identify negative examples. In this case, it may be reliable for comparison in domains with
a well-deﬁned, unimodal, negative class. Non-invariant measures are preferable for evaluating communications in which
there are criteria for both positive and negative results.
4.3. ðI3ÞChange of true positive counts
A measure f([tp;fp;tn;fn]) is invariant under the change of tpif all other matrix counts remain the same f([tp;fp;tn;
fn]) =f([tp0;fp;tn;fn]).
tp fn
fp tn/C20/C21
!tp0fn
fp tn/C20/C21
This measure does not recognize a classiﬁer’s sensitivity. Such evaluation can be complementary to other measures, but
can hardly stay on its own. It may be reliable for comparison in domains with a well-deﬁned, unimodal, negative class. As
opposed to I2, these invariant measures are not suitable for the evaluation of document classiﬁcation. Non-invariant mea-
sures can be used as stand alone for evaluating classiﬁcation with a strong positive class.
4.4. ðI4ÞChange of false negative counts
A measure f([tp;fp;tn;fn]) is invariant under the change of fnif all other matrix counts remain the same f([tp;fp;tn;
fn]) =f([tp;fp;tn;fn0])
tp fn
fp tn/C20/C21
!tp fn0
fp tn"#
Invariance indicates measure stability under disagreement between the data and the negative labels assigned by a clas-
siﬁer. This is especially important for problems involving manual labelling. If a negative class has unreliable labels ( Nigam &
Hurst (2004) argue that humans can agree on only 74% of labels for negative opinion), an invariant measure may give mis-
leading results. For non-invariant measures, its value’s monotonicity is important. If the classiﬁer evaluation improves when
fnincreases, the measure may favor a classiﬁer prone to false negatives. The use of invariant and non-invariant measures
should be decided based on problem and data characteristics.
4.5. ðI5ÞChange of false positive counts
A measure f([tp;fp;tn;fn]) is invariant under the change of fpif all other matrix counts remain the same f([tp;fp;tn;
fn]) =f([tp;fp0;tn;fn]).
tp fn
fp tn/C20/C21
!tp fn
fp0tn/C20/C21
An invariant measure may provide reliable results when some of positive data labels are counter-intuitive. This can hap-
pen when the positive examples have outliers that cannot be explained by the mainstream data. We call such outliers
counterexamples .
A non-invariant measure may not be suitable for data with many counterexamples. If the classiﬁer evaluation improves
when fpincreases, the measure may favor a classiﬁer prone to false positives. This is especially important for problems
involving subjective labelling. Some data entries may not have consistent labels because of the difﬁculty of imposing432 M. Sokolova, G. Lapalme / Information Processing and Management 45 (2009) 427–437
rigorous labelling rules. This can occur in the classiﬁcation of records of long-term communications in which the data may
contain a substantial number of counterexamples.
4.6. ðI6ÞUniform change of positives and negatives
A measure f([tp;fp;tn;fn]) is invariant under a uniform change of positives and negatives if fð½tp;fp;tn;fn/C138Þ
¼fð½k1tp;k1fp;k1tn;k1fn/C138Þ;k1–1.
tp fn
fp tn/C20/C21
!k1tp k 1fn
k1fp k 1tn/C20/C21
An invariant measure is stable with respect to the uniform increase of data size, i.e., scalar multiplication of the confusion
matrix. If we expect that for different data sizes the same proportion of examples will exhibit positive and negative charac-
teristics, then the invariant measure may be a better choice for the evaluation of classiﬁers.
When a measure is non-invariant, then its applicability may depend on data sizes. The non-invariant measures may be
more reliable if we do not know how representative the data sample is in terms of the proportion of positive/negative
examples.
4.7. ðI7ÞChange of positive and negative columns
A measure f([tp;fp;tn;fn]) is invariant under columns’ change if fð½tp;fp;tn;fn/C138Þ ¼ fð½k1tp;k1fp;k2tn;k2fn/C138Þ;k1–k2.
tp fn
fp tn/C20/C21
!k1tp k 2fn
k1fp k 2tn/C20/C21
Suppose that different data sizes have the same proportion of positive and negative examples. This change in the con-
fusion matrix is caused by changes in the proportion of positive and negative labels issued by an algorithm, i.e., the col-
umns are multiplied by different scalars. This may happen when the quality of additional data substantially differs from
the initial data sample (e.g., the information inﬂow can add more noise). However, an invariant measure does not show
the performance change. Thus, it requires support of other measures to assess a classiﬁer’s performance on different
classes.
A non-invariant measure reﬂects on the performance of a classiﬁer on different classes. It is more appropriate if we can
expect a change in the algorithm’s performance across classes.
4.8. ðI8ÞChange of positive and negative rows
A measure f([tp;fp;tn;fn]) is invariant under rows’ change if fð½tp;fp;tn;fn/C138Þ ¼ fð½k1tp;k2fp;k2tn;k1fn/C138Þ;k1–k2.
tp fn
fp tn/C20/C21
!k1tp k 1fn
k2fp k 2tn/C20/C21
We again expect that different data sizes have the same proportion of positive and negative examples. Then the change in
the confusion matrix corresponds to changes of an algorithm’s performance within a positive (negative) class, i.e., the rows
are multiplied by different scalars. For example, this may happen when a positive (negative) class is better represented in the
new data. If we expect that different data sizes exhibit same quality of positive (negative) characteristics, then the invariant
measure may be a better choice for the evaluation of classiﬁers.
When a measure is non-invariant, its applicability may depend on the quality of data classes. The non-invariant measures
may be more reliable if we do not know how representative the data sample is in terms of the quality of positive and neg-
ative classes, which might be the case in web-posted consumer reviews.
For multi-class classiﬁcation, we consider transformations of the confusion matrix for each class Cj. As expected, the mea-
sures retain their invariance properties regardless of micro -o r macro-averaging .
For multi-topic classiﬁcation, Exact Match Ratio and Accuracy have different invariant properties. Thus, referring to Exact
Match Ratio asAccuracy may be misleading.
Measures used in hierarchical classiﬁcation have a somewhat limited reliability because they evaluate the performance of
a classiﬁer either on subclasses or on superclasses, but not on both. Thus, invariance properties should be assessed with re-
spect to the classiﬁcation of subclasses – for Precision #and Recall #, and superclasses – for Precision "and Precision ".
Table 6 displays the invariance properties of the measures described in Tables 2–5 . By assessing the invariant properties
of commonly used measures, we show that Precision ;Precision l;Precision M;Precision #;Precision "exhibit same invariance
characteristics. Thus, we group them as Precision Gfor general. Similarly, we group Recall ;Recall l;Recall M;Recall #, and
Recall "asRecall G;Fscore ;Fscore l;Fscore M;Fscore #, and Fscore "asFscore G, and, ﬁnally, Accuracy ,Average Accuracy , and Error
Rate, essentially 1- Average Accuracy ,a sAccuracyG.
As a result, we further consider only those performance measures that vary in their invariance properties. Table 7 lists the
measures and their properties. Our next step is to associate the invariant properties with particular settings.M. Sokolova, G. Lapalme / Information Processing and Management 45 (2009) 427–437 433
5. Analysis of invariant properties
To identify similarities among the measures, we compare them according to their invariance and non-invariance proper-
ties shown in Table 7 . First, we present measure outliers whose properties remarkably differ them from others. Two mea-
sures hold unique invariant properties: Precision Gis the only measure invariant under vertical scaling ðI7Þand Exact
Match Ratio is the only measure non-invariant under uniform scaling ðI6Þ. Another exception is Retrieval Fscore which is sen-
sitive to all the changes in the confusion matrix except for uniform scaling.
Next we generalize on the properties:
The invariance I1has been much discussed in the Machine Learning community, albeit from a negative point of view ( Jap-
kowicz, 2006 ). But we want to emphasize that this invariance makes AccuracyGand Hamming Loss robust
measures for an algorithm’s overall performance and insensitive to performance on a speciﬁc class. The
corresponding non-invariance I1means that the measures are sensitive to asymmetry of classiﬁcation.
This is a well-known characteristic for Precision ,Recall ,Fscore and Speciﬁcity , but not for AUC, which has
been introduced only recently in text classiﬁcation.
The invariance I2is a well-known property of Precision ,Recall , and Fscore and less known for Labelling Fscore and Hamming
Loss. Invariance under the change of tnhas made them a tool of choice for the evaluation of document
classiﬁcation. The non-invariance I2signiﬁes that the use of non-invariant measures is more appropriateTable 6
Invariance properties of performance measures ðIkÞfor different types of classiﬁcation tasks. + denotes invariance and /C0non-invariance of the measure.
I1 I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 I7 I8
Binary classiﬁcation Table 2
Accuracy + /C0/C0/C0/C0 + /C0/C0
Precision /C0 + /C0 + /C0 ++ /C0
Recall (Sensitivity) /C0 + /C0/C0 ++ /C0 +
Fscore /C0 + /C0/C0/C0+ /C0/C0
Speciﬁcity /C0/C0 ++ /C0 + /C0 +
AUC /C0/C0/C0/C0/C0+ /C0 +
Multi-class classiﬁcation Table 3
Average Accuracy + /C0/C0/C0/C0 + /C0/C0
Error Rate + /C0/C0/C0/C0 + /C0/C0
Precision l /C0 + /C0 + /C0 ++ /C0
Recall l /C0 + /C0/C0 ++ /C0 +
Fscore l /C0 + /C0/C0/C0+ /C0/C0
Precision M /C0 + /C0 + /C0 ++ /C0
Recall M /C0 + /C0/C0 ++ /C0 +
Fscore M /C0 + /C0/C0/C0+ /C0/C0
Multi-topic classiﬁcation Table 4
Exact Match Ratio /C0/C0/C0++ /C0/C0 /C0
Labelling Fscore /C0 + /C0/C0/C0+ /C0/C0
Retrieval Fscore /C0/C0/C0/C0/C0+ /C0/C0
Hamming Loss +++/C0/C0 + /C0/C0
Hierarchical classiﬁcation Table 5
Precision # /C0 + /C0 + /C0 ++ /C0
Recall # /C0 + /C0/C0 ++ /C0 +
Fscore # /C0 + /C0/C0/C0+ /C0/C0
Precision " /C0 + /C0 + /C0 ++ /C0
Precision " /C0 + /C0/C0 ++ /C0 +
Fscore " /C0 + /C0/C0/C0+ /C0/C0
Table 7Performance measures that exhibit different invariance properties. + denotes invariance and /C0non-invariance of the measure.
I1 I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 I7 I8
AccuracyG + /C0/C0/C0/C0 + /C0/C0
Precision G /C0 + /C0 + /C0 ++ /C0
Recall GðSensiti vityÞ/C0 + /C0/C0 ++ /C0 +
Fscore G /C0 + /C0/C0/C0+ /C0/C0
Speciﬁcity /C0/C0 ++ /C0 + /C0 +
AUC /C0/C0/C0/C0/C0+ /C0 +
Exact Match Ratio /C0/C0/C0++ /C0/C0/C0
Labelling Fscore /C0 + /C0/C0/C0+ /C0/C0
Retrieval Fscore /C0/C0/C0/C0/C0+ /C0/C0
Hamming Loss +++/C0/C0 + /C0/C0434 M. Sokolova, G. Lapalme / Information Processing and Management 45 (2009) 427–437
on data with a unimodal negative class than with a multi-modal one. This implication is more important
forAUC than for Speciﬁcity . The latter is usually used in combination with other measures, whereas the
former might be applied separately.
The invariance I3so far eludes thorough studies. Measures are expected to be non-invariant under the change of tp. The
non-invariant measures are used for evaluating classiﬁcation with a strong positive class, such as for theevaluation of document classiﬁcation. Only Speciﬁcity and Hamming Loss do not measure the tpchange.
Speciﬁcity was purposefully designed to avoid tp. The non-invariance of Speciﬁcity and Hamming Loss
suggests they may be used in a combination with other measures. These two measures may be reliable
for comparison in domains with a well-deﬁned, unimodal, negative class.
The invariance I
4under change in fnindicates that Precision ,Speciﬁcity , and Exact Match Ratio may be more reliable when
manual labelling follows rigorous rules for a negative class. In the absence of such rules, disagreement
between the data labels and the negative labels assigned by a classiﬁer can depend on subjective factorsand ﬂuctuate. Under such conditions, an invariant measure may give misleading results. All the
I4mea-
sures discussed above are monotone decreasing when fnincrease hence, will not favor a classiﬁer prone
to false negatives.
The invariance I5under fpchange indicates that Recall and Exact Match Ratio may provide reasonably conservative esti-
mate when a positive class has counterexamples, i.e., outliers not explained by the mainstream positive
examples. The other eight measures are non-invariant. However, they are monotone decreasing when fp
increase, hence, they will not favor a classiﬁer prone to false positives.
The invariance I6under uniform scaling holds for all the measures except Exact Match Ratio . The nine invariant measures
adapt to different sizes of data. The non-invariance of Exact Match Ratio indicates that its results may not
be comparable when obtained on data of widely different sizes.
The invariance I7under the scalar column change holds only for Precision . This supports a common practice of combining
Precision with other measures when assessing classiﬁer performance. The combination assures that the
evaluation is less dependent on the data quality. All the other measures are non-invariant under the sca-lar column change. Thus, they are more reliable if an algorithm’s performance is expected to change
across classes with new data.
The invariance I
8under the scalar row change indicates that Recall ,Speciﬁcity , and AUC may be a better choice for the eval-
uation of classiﬁers if different data sizes exhibit same quality of positive (negative) characteristics. Exam-
ples are simulated or generated data under the same distribution. The other measures are non-invariant.
They may be more reliable if the representative power of positive and negative classes is uncertain.
Invariance with respect to the matrix transformations is especially important because it connects evaluation measures to
particular learning settings. We now summarize the applicability of these measures to two subﬁelds of text classiﬁcation:
document classiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of human communications. One might be tempted to apply Fscore measures on
any text classiﬁcation evaluation. However, various classiﬁcation problems exhibit different characteristics which mayrequire different evaluation measures. Based on our analysis, we propose the following.
Since document classiﬁcation data is often highly imbalanced, relevant documents constitute a small well-deﬁned posi-
tive class, but the rest is a heterogeneous negative class built from non-relevant documents as ‘‘everything non-positive”.
Presence of a negative class that complements the positive class favors the use of the Fscore measures. In many such prob-
lems, examples of the positive class remain the same and the class keeps its modality, whereas examples of the negativeclass change. Since the Fscore measures’ invariance under the change of correctly classiﬁed negative examples ðI
2Þprevents
drastic changes, they will be less sensitive to changes in the negative class.
Classiﬁcation of human communications is most often represented by sentiment classiﬁcation applied to collections of
free form texts containing product evaluations. The number and ratio of positive and negative examples depends on the pop-
ularity of a particular product. If reviewers have strong likes and dislikes, then both classes have well-deﬁned characteristics.
In this case, Area Under the Curve (AUC) may provide a more reliable classiﬁer evaluation than Precision and Recall . Since AUC
is non-invariant under the change of correctly classiﬁed negative examples ðI2Þ, it will detect possible changes in the nega-
tive class better than Fscore measures.
For other types of classiﬁcation of communications in social activities, other measure combinations might also be suit-
able. Political debates and electronic negotiations are examples of such communications. Their data can exhibit a unimodal
negative class and a large number of counterexamples. In political debates, counterexamples are records that praise the
discussed matter, but vote against it at the end, either because of a hidden motive or randomness of behavior ( Sokolova
& Lapalme, 2007 ). In such cases, which are difﬁcult even for human classiﬁcation, Accuracy , with its invariance under the
exchange of positives and negatives classiﬁcation ðI1Þ, and Precision , with its invariance under the change of false negative
examples ðI5Þ, may be used for a reliable evaluation of classiﬁers.
6. Conclusion and future work
In this study, we have analyzed twenty four performance measures used in the complete spectrum of Machine Learning
classiﬁcation tasks: binary, multi-class, multi-labelled, and hierarchical. Effects of changes in the confusion matrix on severalM. Sokolova, G. Lapalme / Information Processing and Management 45 (2009) 427–437 435
well-known measures have been studied. In all the cases, we have shown that the evaluation of classiﬁcation results can
depend on the invariance properties of the measures. A few cases required that we additionally considered monotonicity
of the measure. These properties have allowed us to make ﬁne distinctions in the relations between the measures. One
way to insure a reliable evaluation is to employ a measure corresponding to the expected quality of the data, e.g., represen-
tativeness of class distribution, reliability of class labels, uni- and multi-modality of classes. To match measures with the data
characteristics, we constructed the measure invariance taxonomy with respect to all relevant label distribution changes in a
classiﬁcation problem.
We supplemented the formal discussion by analyzing the applicability of performance measures on different subﬁelds of
text classiﬁcation. We have shown that the classiﬁcation of human communications differs from document classiﬁcation,
and thus that these two types of text classiﬁcation may require different performance measures.
Our study has dealt with measures used in text classiﬁcation but it could be extended to other language applications of
Machine Learning. The next step would be to study measures used in Machine Translation. This will considerably expand themeasure list. Applicability of the measures to traditional Natural Language Processing tasks, e.g., word sense disambiguation,
parsing, is another topic of considerable interest. It would also be useful to analyze in more details a measure’s monotonicity,
especially its behavior with respect to extreme classiﬁcation results, such as when the labels provided by the data and a clas-
siﬁer are independent. Person authentication problems, in which the appropriate measures are a false acceptance rate and a
false rejection rate (Bengio et al., 2005 ), is another example of possible applications.
Acknowledgments
This work has been funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada and the Ontario Centres
of Excellence. We thank Elliott Macklovitch for fruitful suggestions on an early draft. We thank anonymous reviewers for
helpful comments.
References
Asuncion, A., & Newman, D. (2007). UCI Machine Learning Repository. Irvine, CA: University of California, School of Information and Computer Science.
<http://www.ics.uci.edu/mlearn/MLRepository.html> .
Bengio, S., Mariéthoz, J., & Keller, M. (2005). The expected performance curve. In Proceedings of the ICML’05 workshop on ROC analysis in machine learning (pp.
43–50).
Blitzer, J., Dredze, M., & Pereira, F. (2007). Biographies, bollywood, boom-boxes and blenders: Domain adaptation for sentiment classiﬁcation. In Proceedings
of the 45th annual meeting of the association of computational linguistics (pp. 440–447). Association for Computational Linguistics.
Blockeel, H., Bruynooghe, M., Dzeroski, S., Ramon, J., & Struyf, J. (2002). Hierarchical multi-classiﬁcation. In KDD-2002: Workshop on multi-relational data
mining (pp. 21–35).
Bobicev, V., & Sokolova, M. (2008). An effective and robust method for short text classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the association for the advancement of
artiﬁcial intelligence (AAAI-2008) (pp. 1444–1445). AAAI Press.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences . Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Costa, E., Lorena, A., Carvalho, A., & Freitas, A. (2007). A review of performance evaluation measures for hierarchical classiﬁers. In Proceedings of the AAAI
2007 workshop ‘‘Evaluation methods for machine learning” (pp. 1–6).
Demsar, J. (2006). Statistical comparisons of classiﬁers over multiple data sets. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 7 , 1–30.
Dietterich, T. (1998). Approximate statistical tests for comparing supervised classiﬁcation learning algorithms. Neural Computation, 10 , 1895–1923.
Duda, R. O., & Hart, P. E. (1973). Pattern classiﬁcation and scene analysis . John Wiley & Sons.
Eisner, R., Poulin, B., Szafron, D., Lu, P., & Greiner, R. (2005). Improving protein function prediction using the hierarchical structure of the gene ontology. In
Proceedings of IEEE symposium on computational intelligence in bioinformatics and computational biology (pp. 1–10).
Gamon, M., Aue, A., Corston-Oliver, S., & Ringger, E. (2005). Pulse: Mining customer opinions from free text. In Proceedings of the 6th international symposium
on intelligent data analysis (IDA 2005) (pp. 121–132).
Goutte, C., & Gaussier, E. (2005). A probabilistic interpretation of precision, recall and f-score, with implication for evaluation. In Proceedings of 27th European
conference on IR research (ECIR 2005) (pp. 345–359).
Hersh, W., Buckley, C., Leone, T., & Hickam, D. (1997). OHSUMED: An interactive retrieval evaluation and new large test collection for research. In
Proceedings of the 17th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval (SIGIR-97) (pp. 192–201).
Huang, J., & Ling, C. (2007). Constructing new and better evaluation measures for machine learning. In Proceedings of the 20th international joint conference on
artiﬁcial intelligence (IJCAI’2007) (pp. 859–864).
Isselbacher, K., & Braunwald, E. (1994). Harrison’s principles of internal medicine . McGraw-Hill.
Japkowicz, N. (2006). Why question machine learning evaluation methods? In Proceedings of the AAAI’06 workshop on evaluation methods for machine
learning (pp. 6–11).
Kazawa, H., Izumitani, T., Taira, H., & Maeda, E. (2005). Maximal margin labeling for multi-topic text categorization. In Advances in neural information
processing systems (NIPS’04), (Vol. 17, pp. 649–656).
Kiritchenko, S., Matwin, S., Nock, R., & Famili, A. F. (2006). Learning and evaluation in the presence of class hierarchies: Application to text categorization. In
Proceedings of the 19th Canadian conference on AI (AI’2006) (pp. 395–406).
Lachiche, N., & Flach, P. A. (2003). Improving accuracy and cost of two-class and multi-class probabilistic classiﬁers using ROC curves. In Proceedings of
ICML’2003 (pp. 416–423).
Langley, P. (1996). Elements of machine learning. San Francisco, Calif: Morgan Kaufmann.
Li, T., Zhang, C., & Zhu, S. (2006). Empirical studies on multi-label classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 18th IEEE international conference on tools with artiﬁcial
intelligence (pp. 86–92).
Marchand, M., & Shawe-Taylor, J. (2002). The set covering machine. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3 , 723–746.
Mewes, H.-W., Albermann, K., Heumann, K., Lieb, S., & Pfeiffer, F. (1997). MIPS: A database for protein sequences, homology data and yeast genome
information. Nucleic Acids Research, 25 (1), 28–30.
Mitchell, T. (1997). Machine learning. McGraw-Hill.
Nigam, K., & Hurst, M. (2004). Towards a robust metric of opinion. In Proceedings of the AAAI spring symposium on exploring attitude and affect in text
(pp. 98–105). AAAI Press.
Pang, B., Lee, L., & Vaithyanathan, S. (2002). Thumbs up? Sentiment classiﬁcation using machine learning techniques. In Proceedings of empirical methods of
natural language processing (EMNLP’02) (pp. 79–86).436 M. Sokolova, G. Lapalme / Information Processing and Management 45 (2009) 427–437
Rijsbergen, C. (1979). Information retrieval (2nd ed.). London: Butterworths.
Salton, G., & McGill, M. (1993). Introduction to modern information retrieval . New York: McGraw-Hill.
Salzberg, S. L. (1999). On comparing classiﬁers: A critique of current research and methods. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 1 , 1–12.
Sasaki, Y., Rea, B., & Ananiadou, S. (2007). Multi-topic aspects in clinical text classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE international conference on
bioinformatics and biomedicine (pp. 62–70). IEEE Computer Society.
Sebastiani, F. (2002). Machine learning in automated text categorization. ACM Computing Surveys, 34 (1), 1–47.
Shawe-Taylor, J., & Christianini, N. (2004). Kernel methods for pattern analysis . Cambridge University Press.
Snyder, B., & Barzilay, R. (2007). Database-text alignment via structured multilabel classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the international joint conference on
artiﬁcial intelligence (IJCAI-2007) (pp. 1713–1718).
Sokolova, M., Japkowicz, N., & Szpakowicz, S. (2006). Beyond accuracy, F-score and ROC: A family of discriminant measures for performance evaluation. In
Proceedings of the ACS Australian joint conference on artiﬁcial intelligence (pp. 1015–1021).
Sokolova, M., & Lapalme, G. (2007). Performance measures in classiﬁcation of human communication. In Proceedings of the 20th Canadian conference on
artiﬁcial intelligence ( AI’2007) (pp. 159–170).
Sun, A., Lim, E.-P., & Ng, W.-K. (2003). Performance measurement framework for hierarchical text classiﬁcation. Journal of the Americal Society for Information
Science and Technology, 54 (11), 1014–1028.
Tan, P., Kumar, V., & Srivastava, J. (2004). Selecting the right objective measure for association analysis. Information Systems, 29 (4), 293–313.
Tikk, D., & Biró, G. (2003). Experiments with multi-label text classiﬁer on the Reuters collection. In Proceedings of the international conference on
computational cybernetics (ICCC 03) (pp. 33–38).
Thomas, M., Pang, B., & Lee, L. (2006). Get out the vote: Determining support or opposition from congressional ﬂoor-debate transcripts. In: Proceedings of the
2006 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (pp. 327–335).
Wang, R., & Strong, D. (1996). Beyond accuracy: What data quality means to data consumers. Journal of Management Information Systems, 12 (4), 5–34.
Wilson, T., Wiebe, J., & Hwa, R. (2006). Recognizing strong and weak opinion clauses. Computational Intelligence, 22 (2), 73–99.
Yang, Y. (1999). An evaluation of statistical approaches to text categorization. Information Retrieval, 1 , 69–90.
Youden, W. (1950). Index for rating diagnostic tests. Cancer, 3 , 32–35.
Zhu, S., Ji, X., Xu, W., & Gong, Y. (2005). Multi-labelled classiﬁcation using maximum entropy method. In Proceedings of the 28th annual international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval (pp. 274–281).M. Sokolova, G. Lapalme / Information Processing and Management 45 (2009) 427–437 437
