 
D.S. Huang, X.-P. Zhang, G.-B. Huang  (Eds.): ICIC 2005, Part I, LNCS 3644, pp. 878 – 887, 2005. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005 Borderline-SMOTE: A New Over-Sampling Method in 
Imbalanced Data Sets Learning 
Hui Han1, Wen-Yuan Wang1, and Bing-Huan Mao2 
1 Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China 
hanh01@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn 
wwy-dau@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn 
2 Department of Statistics, Central University of Finance and Economics,  
Beijing 100081, P. R. China 
maobinghuan@yahoo.com 
Abstract.  In recent years, mining with imbalanced data sets receives more and 
more attentions in both theoretical and practical aspects. This paper introduces the importance of imbalanced data sets and their broad application domains in 
data mining, and then summarizes the evaluation metrics and the existing meth-
ods to evaluate and solve the imbalance problem. Synthetic minority over-sampling technique (SMOTE) is one of the over-sampling methods addressing 
this problem. Based on SMOTE method, this paper presents two new minority 
over-sampling methods, borderline-SMOTE1 and borderline-SMOTE2, in which only the minority examples near the borderline are over-sampled. For the 
minority class, experiments show that our approaches achieve better TP rate 
and F-value than SMOTE and random over-sampling methods. 
1   Introduction 
There may be two kinds of imbalances in a data set. One is between-class imbalance, 
in which case some classes have much more examples than others [1]. The other is 
within-class imbalance, in which case some subsets of one class have much fewer examples than other subsets of the same class [2]. By convention, in imbalanced data sets, we call the classes having more examples the majority classes and the ones hav-ing fewer examples the minority classes. 
The problem of imbalance has got more and more emphasis in recent years. Imbal-
anced data sets exists in many real-world domains, such as spotting unreliable tele-communication customers [3], detection of oil spills in satellite radar images [4], learning word pronunciations [5], text classification [6], detection of fraudulent tele-phone calls [7], information retrieval and filtering tasks [8], and so on. In these do-mains, what we are really interested in is the minority class other than the majority 
class. Thus, we need a fairly high prediction for the minority class. However, the 
traditional data mining algorithms behaves undesirable in the instance of imbalanced data sets, as the distribution of the data sets is not taken into consideration when these algorithms are designed. 
The structure of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a brief introduc-
tion to the recent developments in the domains of imbalanced data sets. Section 3 
Borderline-SMOTE: A New Over-Sampling Method in Imbalanced Data Sets Learning 879 
 describes our over-sampling methods on resolving the imbalanced problem. Section 4 
presents the experiments and compares our methods with other over-sampling meth-ods. Section 5 draws the conclusion. 
2.   The Recent Developments in Imbalanced Data Sets Learning 
2.1   Evaluation Metrics in Imbalanced Domains  
Most of the studies in imbalanced domains mainly concentrate on two-class problem 
as multi-class problem can be simplified to two-class problem. By convention, the 
class label of the minority class is positive, and the class label of the majority class is negative. Table 1 illustrates a confusion matrix of a two-class problem. The first col-umn of the table is the actual class label of the examples, and the first row presents their predicted class label. TP and TN denote the number of positive and negative examples that are classified correctly, while FN and FP denote the number of misclas-
sified positive and negative examples respectively. 
Table 1.  Confusion matrix for a two-class problem 
 Predicted Positive Predicted Negative 
Positive TP FN 
Negative FP TN 
 
Accuracy = (TP+TN)/(TP+FN+FP+TN) (1) 
FP rate = FP/(TN+FP) (2) 
TP rate = Recall = TP/(TP+FN) (3) 
Precision = TP/(TP+FP) (4) 
) Pr Re /() Pr Re) 1((2 2ecision call ecision call valueF + ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ + = − β β (5) 
 
When used to evaluate the performance of a learner for imbalanced data sets, accu-
racy is generally apt to predict the majority class better and behaves poorly to the minority class. We can come to this conclusion from its definition (formula (1)): if the dataset is extremely imbalanced, even when the classifier classifies all the majority examples correctly and misclassifies all the minority examples, the accuracy of the 
learner is still high because there are much more majority examples than minority 
examples. Under the circumstance, accuracy can not reflect reliable prediction for the minority class. Thus, more reasonable evaluation metrics are needed.  
ROC curve [9] is one of the popular metrics to evaluate the learners for imbalanced 
data sets. It is a two-dimensional graph in which TP rate is plotted on the y-axis and 
880 H. Han, W.-Y. Wang, and B.-H. Mao 
 FP rate is plotted on the x-axis. FP rate (formula (2)) denotes the percentage of the 
misclassified negative examples, and TP rate (formula (3)) is the percentage of the correctly classified positive examples. The point (0, 1) is the ideal point of the learn-ers. ROC curve depicts relative trade-offs  between benefits (TP rate) and costs (FP 
rate). AUC (Area under ROC) can also be applied to evaluate the imbalanced data 
sets [9]. Furthermore, F-value (formula (5)) is also a popular evaluation metric for 
imbalance problem [10]. It is a kind of combination of recall (formula (3)) and preci-sion (formula (4)), which are effective metrics for information retrieval community where the imbalance problem exist. F-value is high when both recall and precision are 
high, and can be adjusted through changing the value of
β, where βcorresponds to 
relative importance of precision vs. recall and it is usually set to 1.  
The above evaluation metrics can reasonably evaluate the learner for imbalanced 
data sets because their formulae are relative to the minority class. 
2.2   Methods for Dealing with Imbalanced Data Sets Learning 
The solutions to imbalanced data sets can be divided into data and algorithmic levels. 
categories. The methods at data level change the distribution of the imbalanced data 
sets, and then the balanced data sets are provided to the learner to improve the detec-tion rate of minority class. The methods at the algorithm level modify the existing data mining algorithms or put forward new algorithms to resolve the imbalance  problem. 
2.2.1   The Methods at Data Level 
At the data level, different forms of re-sampling methods were proposed [1]. The simplest re-sampling methods are random over-sampling and random under-sampling. The former augments the minority class by exactly duplicating the examples of the minority class, while the latter randomly takes away some examples of the majority class. However, random over-sampling may make the decision regions of the learner 
smaller and more specific, thus cause the learner to over-fit. Random under-sampling 
can reduce some useful information of the data sets. Many improved re-sampling methods are thus presented, such as heuristic re-sampling methods, combination of over-sampling and under-sampling methods, embedding re-sampling methods into data mining algorithms, and so on. Some of the improved re-sampling methods are as follows. 
Kubat et al. presented a heuristic under-sampling method which balanced the data 
set through eliminating the noise and redundant examples of the majority class [11]. Nitesh et al. over-sampled the minority class through SMOTE (Synthetic Minority 
Over-sampling Technique) method, which generated new synthetic examples along the line between the minority examples and their selected nearest neighbors [12]. The advantage of SMOTE is that it makes the decision regions larger and less specific. 
Nitesh et al. integrated SMOTE into a stan dard boosting procedure, thus improved the 
prediction of the minority class while not sacrificing the accuracy of the whole testing set [13]. Gustavo et al. combined over-sampling and under-sampling methods to re-solve the imbalanced problem [14]. Andrew Estabrooks et al. proposed a multiple re-sampling method which selected the most appropriate re-sampling rate adaptively 
[15]. Taeho Jo et al. put forward a cluster-based over-sampling method which dealt 
Borderline-SMOTE: A New Over-Sampling Method in Imbalanced Data Sets Learning 881 
 with between-class imbalance and within -class imbalance simultaneously [16]. 
Hongyu Guo et al. found out hard examples of the majority and minority classes dur-ing the process of boosting, then generated new synthetic examples from hard exam-ples and add them to the data sets [17]. 
2.2.2   The Methods at Algorithm Level 
The methods at algorithm level operate on the algorithms other than the data sets. The standard boosting algorithm, e.g. Adaboost [18], increases the weights of misclassi-fied examples and decreases those correc tly classified using the same proportion, 
without considering the imbalance of the data sets. Thus, traditional boosting algo-rithms do not perform well on the minority class. Aiming at the disadvantage above, Mahesh V. Joshi et al. proposed an improved boosting algorithm which updated 
weights of positive prediction (TP and FP) differently from weights of negative pre-
diction (TN and FN). The new algorithm can achieve better prediction for the minor-ity class [19]. When dealing with imbalanced data sets, the class boundary learned by Support Vector Machines (SVMs) is apt to skew toward the minority class, thus in-crease the misclassified rate of the minority class. Gang Wu et al. proposed class-boundary alignment algorithm which modify the class boundary through changing the 
kernel function of SVMs [20]. Kaizhu Hu ang et al. presented Biased Minimax Prob-
ability Machine (BMPM) to resolve the imbalance problem. Given the reliable mean and covariance matrices of the majority and minority classes, BMPM can derive the decision hyperplane by adjusting the lower bound of the real accuracy of the testing set [21]. Furthermore, there are other effec tive methods such as cost-based learning, 
adjusting the probability of the learners and one-class learning, and so on [22] [23]. 
3   A New Over-Sampling Method: Borderline-SMOTE 
In order to achieve better prediction, most of the classification algorithms attempt to 
learn the borderline of each class as exactly as possible in the training process. The 
examples on the borderline and the ones nearby (we call them borderline examples in this paper) are more apt to be misclassified than the ones far from the borderline, and thus more important for classification. 
Based on the analysis above, those examples far from the borderline may contrib-
ute little to classification. We thus present two new minority over-sampling methods, borderline-SMOTE1 and borderline-SMOTE2, in which only the borderline examples of the minority class are over-sampled. Our methods are different from the existing over-sampling methods in which all the minority examples or a random subset of the minority class are over-sampled [1] [2] [12]. 
Our methods are based on SMOTE (Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique) 
[12]. SMOTE generates synthetic minority examples to over-sample the minority class. For every minority example, its 
k (which is set to 5 in SMOTE) nearest 
neighbors of the same class are calculated, then some examples are randomly selected 
from them according to the over-sampling rate. After that, new synthetic examples are generated along the line between the mino rity example and its selected nearest 
neighbors. Not like the existing over-sampling methods, our methods only over-
sample or strengthen the borderline minority examples. First, we find out the border-
882 H. Han, W.-Y. Wang, and B.-H. Mao 
 line minority examples; then, synthetic examples are generated from them and added 
to the original training set. Suppose that the whole training set is T, the minority class 
is P and the majority class is N, and 
} ,...,,{2 1 pnump pp P= , } ,...,,{21 nnumn nn N=  
where pnum andnnum  are the number of minority and majority examples. The de-
tailed procedure of borderline-SMOTE1 is as follows. 
Step 1. For every ) ,...,2,1( pnum ipi= in the minority class P, we calculate its m near-
est neighbors from the whole training set T. The number of majority examples among 
the m nearest neighbors is denoted by )' 0(' mm m ≤≤ . 
Step 2. If m m=' , i.e. all the m nearest neighbors ofip are majority examples, ipi s  
considered to be noise and is not operated in the following steps. If mm m <≤' 2/ , 
namely the number ofip ’s majority nearest neighbors is larger than the number of its 
minority ones, ip is considered to be easily misclassified and put into a set DANGER. 
If 2/ ' 0 mm<≤ , ip is safe and needs not to participate in the follows steps. 
Step 3. The examples in DANGER are the borderline data of the minority class P, and 
we can see that P DANGER ⊆. We set  
pnum dnum p pp DANGERdnum ≤ ≤ = 0 }, ' ,...,','{2 1  
For each example in DANGER , we calculate its knearest neighbors from P. 
Step 4. In this step, we generate dnum s×  synthetic positive examples from the data 
in DANGER, where s is an integer between 1 and k . For eachip', we randomly select 
s nearest neighbors from its k nearest neighbors in P. Firstly, we calculate the differ-
ences, jdif ),...,2,1( s j= betweenip'and its s nearest neighbors from P , then multi-
plyjdif by a random numberjr ),...,2,1( s j=  between 0 and 1, finally, s new syn-
thetic minority examples are generated betweenip'and its nearest neighbors: 
s j difrp syntheticj j i j ,...,2,1 , ' = ×+ =  
We repeat the above procedure for eachip'i n  DANGER  and can at-
tain dnums× synthetic examples. This step is similar with SMOTE, for more detail 
see [12]. 
In the procedure above,ip,in,ip',jdifandj synthetic are vectors. We can see that 
new synthetic data are generated along the line between the minority borderline ex-
amples and their nearest neighbors of the same class, thus strengthened the borderline 
examples. 
Borderline-SMOTE2 not only generates synthetic examples from each example 
in DANGER  and its positive nearest neighbors in P, but also does that from its nearest 
negative neighbor in N. The difference between it and its nearest negative neighbor is 
Borderline-SMOTE: A New Over-Sampling Method in Imbalanced Data Sets Learning 883 
 multiplied a random number between 0 and 0.5, thus the new generated examples are 
closer to the minority class.  
Our methods can be easily understood with the following simulated data set, Cir-
cle, which has two classes. Fig. 1 (a) shows the original distribution of the data set, 
the circle points represent majority examples and the plus signs are minority exam-
ples. Firstly, we apply borderline-SMOTE to find out the borderline examples of the 
minority class, which are denoted by solid squares in Fig. 1 (b). Then, new synthetic examples are generated through those borderline examples of the minority class. The synthetic examples are shown in Fig. 1 (c) with hollow squares. It is easy to find out from the figures that, different from SMOTE, our methods only over-sample or strengthen the borderline and its nearby points of the minority class. 
 
1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.01.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
 
             (a)                                          (b)                                        (c) 
Fig. 1.  (a) The original distribution of Circle data set. (b) The borderline minority examples 
(solid squares ). (c) The borderline synthetic minority examples ( hollow squares ). 
4   Experiments  
We use TP rate and F-value for the minority class to evaluate the results of our ex-
periments. TP rate denotes the accuracy of the minority class. And the value of β in 
F-value is set to 1 in this paper. 
The four data sets used in our experiments are shown in Table 2. Among the four 
data sets, Circle is our simulated data set depicted in Fig. 1, and the others are from 
UCI [24]. All the attributes in the data sets are quantitative. For Satimage, we choose 
class label “4” as the minority class and regard the remainders as the majority class, as we only study two-class problem in this paper. 
Table 2.  The description of the data sets 
The name  
of Data set number of  
Examples number of 
AttributesClass label 
(minority : majority)Percentage of 
minority class 
Circle(Simulation) 1600 2 1:0 6.25% 
Pima(UCI) 768 8 1:0 34.77% Satimage(UCI) 6435 36 4:remainder 9.73% 
Haberman(UCI) 306 3 Die : Survive 26.47% 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.01.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.01.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
884 H. Han, W.-Y. Wang, and B.-H. Mao 
 In our experiments, four over-sampling methods are applied to the data sets: 
SMOTE, random over-sampling and our methods, borderline-SMOTE1 and border-line-SMOTE2, among which random over-sampling method augments the minority class by exactly duplicating the positive examples partly or completely [1]. Through increasing the number of examples in the minority class, over-sampling methods can balance the distribution of the data sets and improve the detection rate of the minority class. 
In order to compare the results conveniently, the value of
min our methods is set in 
a way that, the number of the minority examples in DANGER is about half of the 
minority class. The value of k is set to 5 like SMOTE. For each method, the TP rates 
and F-values are attained through 10-fold cross-validation. In order to decrease the 
randomness in SMOTE and our methods, the TP rates and F-values for these methods are the average results of three independent 10-fold cross-validation experiments. After the original training sets are over-sampled with the methods above, C4.5 is applied as the validation classifier [25]. 
Since the nature of imbalance problem is to improve the prediction performance of 
the minority class, we only present the results of the minority class. We compare the results of the data sets through TP rate and F-value of the minority class. TP rate re-flects the performance of the learner on the minority class of the testing set, while F-value shows the performance of the learner on the whole testing set. 
Fig. 2 shows our experimental results. In the figure, (a), (b), (c) and (d) depict the 
F-value and TP rate for the minority class when the four over-sampling methods are applied on Circle, Pima, Satimage and Haberman respectively. The x-axis in each figure is the number of the new synthetic examples. The F-value and TP rate of the original data sets with C4.5 are also shown in the figures. 
The results illustrated in Fig. 2 reveal the following results. First of all, all the four 
over-sampling methods improve TP rate of the minority class. For Circle, Pima and Haberman, the TP rates of our methods are better than SMOTE and random over-sampling. Comparing with the original data sets, the best improvements of TP rate for borderline-SMOTE1 and borderline-SMOTE2 on Circle are 20 and 22 per cent, 21.3 and 20.5 per cent on Pima, 10.1 and 10.0 per cent on Satimage, and both 45.2 per cent on Haberman. For Satimage, the TP rates of our methods are lager than that of random over-sampling, and are comparable with SMOTE. Secondly, the F-value of borderline-SMOTE1 is generally better than SMOTE and random over-sampling, and the F-value of borderline-SMOTE2 is also comparable with others. Comparing with the original data sets, the best improvements of F-value for borderline-SMOTE1 and borderline-SMOTE2 on Circle are 12.1 and 10.3 per cent, 2.3 and 1.3 per cent on Pima, 2.3 and 1.4 per cent on Satimage, and 24.7 and 23.0 per cent on Haberman. 
As a whole, border-SMOTE1 behaves excellent on both TP rate and F-value, and 
borderline-SMOTE2 behaves super on TP rate because it generates synthetic exam-ples from both the minority borderline examples and their nearest neighbors of the majority class, however, the procedure causes overlap between the two classes, thus decreases its F-value to some extent. 
 
Borderline-SMOTE: A New Over-Sampling Method in Imbalanced Data Sets Learning 885 
 synthetic40030020010000.9
0.8
0.70.6
0.54003002001000
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5F-value TP rate
method
original
random
smoteborsmote1
borsmote2
   
                                  (a)                                                                  (b) 
synthetic3000 2000 1000 00.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.33000 2000 1000 0
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3F-value TP rate
method
original
random
smoteborsmote1
borsmote2
  
                                   (c)                                                                 (d) 
Fig. 2.  (a), (b), (c) and (d) illustrate the F-value and TP rate for minority class when proposed 
over-sampling methods are applied on Circle, Pima, Satimge and Haberman respectively with 
C4.5. “borsmote1” and “borsmote2” denote borderline-SMOTE1 and borderline-SMOTE2, 
“random” denotes random over-sampling, and “original” denotes the values of the original data sets. The x-axis is the number of synthetic examples 
5   Conclusion 
In recent years, learning with imbalanced data sets receives more and more attentions 
in both theoretical and practical aspects. However, traditional data mining methods are not satisfactory. Aiming to solve the problem, two new synthetic minority over-sampling methods, borderline-SMOTE1 and borderline-SMOTE2 are presented in this paper. We compared the TP rate and F-value of our methods with SMOTE, ran-dom over-sampling and the original C4.5 for four data sets. synthetic400 300 200 10000.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2400 300 200 1000
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2F-value TP rate
method
original
random
smoteborsmote1
borsmote2synthetic1200900 600 30000.7
0.6
0.5
0.40.31200900 600 3000
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4F-value TP rate
method
original
random
smoteborsmote1
borsmote2
886 H. Han, W.-Y. Wang, and B.-H. Mao 
 The borderline examples of the minority class are more easily misclassified than 
those ones far from the borderline. Thus our methods only over-sample the borderline examples of the minority class, while SMOTE and random over-sampling augment the minority class through all the examples from the minority class or a random sub-set of the minority class. Experiments indicate that our methods behave better, which 
validates the efficiency of our methods.  
There are several topics left to be considered  further in this line of research. Differ-
ent strategies to define the 
DANGER  examples, and automated adaptive determination 
of the number of examples in DANGER  would be valuable. The combination of our 
methods with under-sampling methods and the integration of our methods to some data mining algorithms, are also worth trying. 
References 
1. Nitesh V.Chawla, Nathalie Japkowicz and Alek sander Kolcz.:  Editorial: Special Issue on 
Learning from Imbalanced Data Sets. SIGKDD Explorations 6 (1) (2004) 1-6 
2. G. Weiss: Mining with rarity: A unifying framework. SIGKDD Explorations 6 (1) (2004) 
7-19  
3. Ezawa, K.J., Singh, M. and Norton, S.W.: Learning Goal Oriented Bayesian Networks for 
Telecommunications Management. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, ICML’96(pp. 139-147), Bari, Italy, Morgan Kaufmann (1996) 
4. Kubat, m., Holte, R., and Matwin, S.: Machine Learning for the Detection of Oil Spills in 
Satellite Radar Images. Machine Learning 30 195-215 
5. A. van den Bosch, T. Weijters, H. J. van den Herik, and W. Daelemans: When small dis-
juncts abound, try lazy learning: A case study. In Proceedings of the Seventh Belgian-
Dutch Conference on Machine Learning (1997) 109-118 
6. Zhaohui Zheng, Xiaoyun Wu, Rohini Srihari: Feature Selection for Text Categorization on 
Imbalanced Data. SIGKDD Explor ations 6 (1) (2004) 80-89  
7. Fawcett, T.and Provost, F.: Combining Data Mining and Machine Learning for Effective 
User Profile. Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Portland OR, AAAI Press (1996)  8-13 
8. Lewis, D. and Catlett, Heterogeneous, J.: Un certainty Sampling for Supervized Learning. 
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’94 (1994) 148-156 
9. Bradley A.: The use of the area under the ROC curve in the evaluation of machine learning 
algorithms. Pattern Recognition 30 (7) (1997) 1145-1159  
10. Rijsbergen, C. J. van: Information Retrieval, Butterworths, London (1979) 
11. Kubat, M., and Matwin, S. Addressing the Course of Imbalanced Training Sets: One-sided 
Selection. In ICML’97  (1997) 179-186  
12. Chawla, N.V., Bowyer,K.W., Hall, L.O., Kegelmeyer W.P.: SMOTE: Synthetic Minority 
Over-Sampling Technique. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research  16 (2002) 321-357 
13. Chawla, N.V., Lazarevic, A.,  Hall, L.O. and Bowyer, K.: SMOTEBoost: Improving pre-
diction of the Minority Class in Boosting. 7
th European Conference on Principles and Prac-
tice of Knowledge Discovery in Databases, Cavtat Dubrovnik, Croatia (2003) 107-119 
14. Gustavo, E.A., Batista, P.A., Ronaldo, C., Prati, Maria Carolina Monard: A Study of the 
Behavior of Several Methods for Balancing Machine Learning Training Data. SIGKDD 
Explorations 6 (1) (2004) 20-29 
 
Borderline-SMOTE: A New Over-Sampling Method in Imbalanced Data Sets Learning 887 
 15. Andrew Estabrooks, Taeho Jo and Nathalie Japkowicz: A Multiple Resampling Method 
for Learning from Imbalanced Data Sets. Comprtational Intelligence 20 (1) (2004) 18-36 
16. Taeho Jo, Nathalie Japkowicz: Class Imbalances versus Small Disjuncts. Sigkdd Explora-
tions 6 (1) (2004) 40-49 
17. Hongyu Guo, Herna L Viktor: Learning from Imbalanced Data Sets with Boosting and 
Data Generation: The DataBoost-IM Approach. Sigkdd Explorations 6 (1) (2004) 30-39 
18. Yoav Freund, Robert Schapire: A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learning and an application to boosting. Journal of Computer and System Sciences 55 (1) (1997) 119-139 
19. Joshi, M., Kumar,V., Agarwal, R.: Evaluati ng Boosting Algorithms to Classify Rare 
Classes: Comparison and Improvements. First IEEE International Conference on Data Mining, San Jose, CA (2001) 
20. Gang Wu, Edward Y.Chang. Class-Boundary Alignment for Imbalanced Dataset Learning. Workshop on Learning from Imbalanced Datasets II, ICML, Washington DC (2003) 
21. Kaizhu Huang, Haiqin Yang, Irwin King, Michael R. Lyu. Learning Classifiers from Im-
balanced Data Based on Biased Minimax Probability Machine. Proceedings of the IEEE 
Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2004) 
22. Dietterich, T., Margineantu, D., Provost, F. and P. Turney, edited, Proceedings of the 
ICML’2000 Workshop on Cost-sensitive Learning (2000) 
23. Manevitz, L.M. and Yousef, M.: One-class SVMs for document classification. Journal of 
Machine Learning Research  2 (2001) 139-154 
24. Blake, C., & Merz, C. (1998). UCI Repository of Machine Learning Databases http://www.ics.uci.edu/ ∼mlearn/ ∼MLRepository.html. Department of Information and 
Computer Sciences, University of California, Irvine 
25. Quinlan, J. C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA (1992)
 
