 Data Imbalance in Classiﬁcation: Experimental Evaluation
Journal Pre-proof
Data Imbalance in Classiﬁcation: Experimental Evaluation
Fadi Thabtah , Suhel Hammoud, Firuz Kamalov,
Amanda H. Gonsalvesv
PII: S0020-0255(19)31049-7
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2019.11.004
Reference: INS 14996
To appear in: Information Sciences
Received date: 5 June 2019
Revised date: 4 November 2019
Accepted date: 8 November 2019
Please cite this article as: Fadi Thabtah , Suhel Hammoud, Firuz Kamalov, Amanda H. Gonsalvesv,
Data Imbalance in Classiﬁcation: Experimental Evaluation, Information Sciences (2019), doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2019.11.004
This is a PDF ﬁle of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition
of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the deﬁnitive version of
record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published
in its ﬁnal form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article. Please note that,
during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal
disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
©2019 Published by Elsevier Inc.
Data Imbalance in Classiﬁcation: Experimental Evaluation
Fadi Thabtaha,1,∗, Suhel Hammoudb, Firuz Kamalovc, Amanda H. Gonsalvesvd
aManukau Institute of Technology
bUniversity of Kalamoon
cCanadian University Dubai
dManukau Institute of Technology
Abstract
The advent of Big Data has ushered a new era of scientiﬁc breakthroughs. One of the common
issues that affects raw data is class imbalance problem which refers to imbalanced distribution
of values of the response variable. This issue is present in fraud detection, network intrusion
detection, medical diagnostics, and a number of other ﬁelds where negatively labeled instances
signiﬁcantly outnumber positively labeled instances. Modern machine learning techniques strug-
gle to deal with imbalanced data by focusing on minimizing the error rate for the majority class
while ignoring the minority class. The goal of our paper is demonstrate the effects of class im-
balance on classiﬁcation models. Concretely, we study the impact of varying class imbalance
ratios on classiﬁer accuracy. By highlighting the precise nature of the relationship between the
degree of class imbalance and the corresponding effects on classiﬁer performance we hope to help
researchers to better tackle the problem. To this end, we carry out extensive experiments using 10-
fold cross validation on a large number of datasets. Our analysis conﬁrms that class imbalance has
a signiﬁcant negative impact on the performance of a classiﬁer. In particular, we determine that
the relationship between the class imbalance ratio and the accuracy is convex. We also ﬁnd that
addressing the issue of class imbalance in the pre-training phase can have a substantial positive
impact on the accuracy of a classiﬁer.
Keywords: Classiﬁcation, Class Imbalance, Data Analysis, Machine Learning, Statistical
Analysis, Supervised Learning.
1. Introduction
In machine learning, classiﬁers are derived to minimize misclassiﬁcation errors and thereby
maximize predictive accuracy (Boyle, 2018). The underlying assumption in these classiﬁcation
methods is that the dataset under study has a roughly balanced number of instances per available
∗I am corresponding author
Email addresses: Fadi.fayez@manukau.ac.nz (Fadi Thabtah), suhel.hammoud@uok.edu.sy
(Suhel Hammoud), firuz@cud.ac.ae (Firuz Kamalov), gons16@manukaumail.com (Amanda H.
Gonsalvesv)
1Auckland, New Zealand
Preprint submitted to Information Science November 11, 2019
         
         
class. In other words, it assumes that the prior probabilities of the target classes are similar (Guo,
Yin, Dong, Yang,& Zhou, 2008). However, in many real-world domains, such as medical diag-
nostics, most of the classiﬁcation data tends to be skewed towards negative class value. Data is
said to be imbalanced if at least one of the target variable values has a signiﬁcantly smaller number
of instances when compared to the other values. Class imbalance is especially prevalent in mod-
els used to detect rare but important diseases such as autism spectrum disorder (Thabtah, 2018a;
Thabtah, Kamalov & Rajab, 2018).
Longadge, Dongre & Malik (2013) deﬁne class imbalance problems in terms of skewness.
The authors state that this problem occurs when a dataset is severely skewed which can result in a
high rate of False Negatives (FN). Imbalanced class is an intrinsic issue that exists in a wide array
of real-world applications such as fraud detection (Nazrul, 2018), text classiﬁcation (Liu, Loh,
Youcef-Toumi, & Tor, 2007), face and image recognition (Huang, Li, Loy, & Tang, 2018), and
medical diagnosis (Belarouci & Chikh, 2017; Thabtah 2018b; Thabtah & Peebles 2019). Ouyang,
Chen, & Wei (2017) highlight the effect of imbalanced classes on an oil spill detection system.
This system uses synthetic aperture radar (SAR) to detect and prevent the environmental impact
of oil spillages and deter illegal dumping. However, with only 10% of the spills originating from
the sea beds, the database contains far less images of oil spills than those without oil spills. This
creates further challenges associated with interpreting the results of data processing (Guo et al.,
2008).
Classiﬁcation performance of an algorithm is affected when the dataset under study is highly
imbalanced, (Boyle, 2018; Buda, 2017; Anwar, 2012; Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer,
2002). Traditionally, classiﬁcation algorithms are driven to increase the predictive accuracy of the
derived classiﬁers. However, maximizing the overall accuracy may not be the best approach in
case of an imbalanced dataset. While maximizing the overall accuracy a classiﬁer focuses on the
majority class as it has the higher weight in the data. As a result the classiﬁer can achieve a high
degree of accuracy on the majority class, and by extension on the overall dataset, all the while
performing poorly on the minority set. It is worth noting that identifying the minority instances
is often of greater importance as in the case of rare diseases. Thus, the accuracy metric would
no longer be a proper evaluation measure and the derived classiﬁers may produce misleading
information, especially with regards to the minority class (Yang & Wu, 2006; Chawla 2005).
The effects of class imbalance on the performance of convolutional neural networks was stud-
ied by Buda et al. (2018) who ﬁnd that class imbalance leads to decreased performance of neural
networks. The authors also conclude that the best method to combat class imbalance is oversam-
pling and that the optimal oversampling rate is at 50%. Zhu et al (2017) investigated the problem
of class imbalance in the context of customer churn prediction. Concretely, the authors use ex-
pected maximum proﬁt criterion as one of the main performance measures and discover a lot of
room for improvement in the proﬁt based measure. The use of a particular evaluation metric is also
found to have an impact on the solution. Prati et al. (2015) put forth an experimental design that
aims to assess the performance of class imbalance treatment methods. In their study the authors
show that low class imbalance ratios do not result in signiﬁcant performance loss. However, the
performance loss increases quickly for highly imbalanced data.
Our goal is to study the impact of changing class imbalance ratios on the accuracy of a clas-
siﬁer. It is certainly well known that class imbalance causes problems for classiﬁers. There are
2
         
         
many studies on the topic, such as: Ouyang et al. (2017); Ali, Shamsuddin, & Ralescu (2015);
Hulse, Khoshgoftaar, & Napolitano (2007). However, only a limited number of experimental stud-
ies have considered the impact of varying class imbalance ratios on classiﬁers. The exact nature
of the relationship between the degree of class imbalance and the classiﬁer performance has not
been satisfactorily studied. Our contribution is to highlight this relationship in more detail. To this
end, we aim to perform a comprehensive study on the effects of modifying class imbalance ratios
on classiﬁer performance. Our study is based on the analysis of a number of different datasets
using a range of performance metrics. In order to properly account for class skewness the eval-
uation metrics used in the paper include error rate, precision, recall, and area under ROC curve
(AUC). The new information presented in the paper about the nature of the relationship between
the degree of class imbalance and the corresponding classiﬁer performance will help researchers
to better understand the class imbalance problem.
A key aspect of our study is the investigation of class imbalance in the context of behavioural
science. Although the issue of class imbalance is common in behavioural disorder diagnostics its
effects have not been properly investigated. To ﬁll this gap in knowledge we undertake the study
of class imbalance in diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). In particular, we analyse the
impact of class imbalance on ASD detection systems by considering varying imbalance ratios and
the corresponding classiﬁer performance. Furthermore, we study various resampling techniques to
combat class imbalance in ASD data. To summarize, our paper aims to accomplish the following
research goals:
•Carry out a comprehensive study on the impact of varying class imbalance ratios on classiﬁer
performance using a wide range of evaluation metrics.
•Investigate the issue of class imbalance in the context of ASD and the effectiveness of vari-
ous remedial techniques.
We used the probabilistic Nave Bayes as the base classiﬁer in our experiments (Duda &
Hart, 1973). All the experiments are performed using ten-fold cross validation. In order to
study the effects of varying the imbalance ratio, the performance of classiﬁers on each dataset
was recorded based on nine different ratios of the binary response variable namely 10%:90%,
20%:80%, 30%:70%, 40%:60%, 50%:50%, 60%:40%, 70%:30%, 80%:20%, 90%:10%. Section
4 contains further details about the experimental set up, methods used, and analysis of the results.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 outlines the problem and provides common ex-
amples from different applications. Section 3 reviews common techniques that handle the class
imbalance problem such as under-sampling and oversampling. Section 3 is devoted to the descrip-
tion of the computational intelligence method. In Section 4, the data features, experiments, and
results analysis are explained and Section 5 concludes the paper.
2. The Problem and Examples
To better understand the class imbalance problem consider an autism diagnosis dataset con-
sisting of 970 instances not on the spectrum (controls) and 30 instances on the spectrum (cases).
A classiﬁer trained on this dataset will typically predict a test case to belong to No Autism since
3
         
         
the vast majority of training datasets are linked with controls. In fact, the nave strategy of guessing
any new individual as not having autism would produce 97% accuracy. However, considering the
nature of this behavioural application, it is more important to predict individuals who are on the
spectrum so they can seek appropriate help. Early diagnosis could potentially slow down any fur-
ther development of the disorder and speed up access to the necessary healthcare services. Since
the dataset in our example is signiﬁcantly imbalanced typical metrics such as error rate or predic-
tive accuracy would not be suitable to evaluate the performance of classiﬁers. In the presence of
an imbalanced class in a dataset, the classiﬁer gives more importance to the majority class and the
rare instances either go undiscovered, ignored, or assumed to be noisy data (Ali et al., 2015). This
increases the misclassiﬁcations of the minority class, which is at times more crucial, particularly
in medical informatics applications. For example, in the early diagnosis of coronary heart disease
(CHD), misclassifying a non-CHD person as CHD will lead to additional medical tests. However,
misclassifying a person with CHD as non-CHD will not only alter the course of the treatment,
but can also lead to complications and prove fatal. As a result, it is important that the imbalanced
class problem in classiﬁcation is addressed early. Anomaly detection is closely related to imbal-
anced class as the members of the minority class can be treated as outliers and dealt accordingly
(Abdelhamid, Ayesh & Thabtah, 2013).
Fraud detection is another important source of imbalanced data. The most common fraud
analysis is associated with detecting credit card fraud. Fraud detection is performed by checking
the company’s transactions database. However, these datasets have many more legitimate cases
than fraudulent ones making the prediction problem of fraudulent activities challenging (AlSh-
boul Thabtah, Abdelhamid & Al-diabat, 2018). Another key element that affects the performance
of the classiﬁer is the sample size of the data (Chawla, 2005). A dataset with a low frequency
class creates challenges in discovering patterns for the minority class which in turn hinders the
classiﬁcation of test data associated with the minority class (Sun, Wong, & Kamel, 2009). In a
study by Japkowicz & Stephen (2002), the authors reported that the error rate of minority class
instances can be reduced when adding more synthetic instances to that class. Another study by
Chalwa (2005), revealed that creating new instances for the minority class using oversampling
may stabilise the performance of classiﬁers.
3. Common Approaches for Addressing Data Imbalance
Various methods have been developed to handle the class imbalance problem that can be
broadly divided into two main approaches: Data driven and algorithm driven. The former attempts
to balance the class distribution (Buda, 2017). The latter approach adjusts the learning algorithm,
or the classiﬁer without amending the training set (Chawla, 2005). In the next sub-sections, we
brieﬂy review these approaches and reveal their advantage and disadvantages.
3.1. Data Driven Approaches
Data driven approaches adjust the class ratio in the input dataset to achieve balanced class dis-
tribution. This approach often employs sampling techniques like under-sampling, oversampling,
or a combination of both (Ali et al, 2015).
4
         
         
3.1.1. Under-sampling
The primary under-sampling technique that arbitrarily eliminates examples of the majority
class to balance the dataset is known as random under-sampling (Kotsiantis, Kanellopoulos, &
Pintelas, 2006). Researchers such as Guo et al. (2008) reveal the primary drawback associated
with this method to be the disposal of useful information that can prove to be crucial in the later
classiﬁcation stages. Many under-sampling approaches have been proposed such as Condensed
Nearest Neighbour Rule (CNN), Wilsons Edited Nearest Neighbour Rule (ENN), Neighbourhood
Cleaning Rule (NCL), Tomek Links, and One-sided selection (OSS) (Hart, 1968; Tomek, 1976;
Wilson, 1972; Laurikkala, 2001).
Wilson (1972), proposes the CNN method in which if the class label of any example is different
from the class of at least two of its nearest three neighbours, then the example is eliminated from
the dataset. Tomek (1976) proposed the Tomek Links method, which is a modiﬁed CNN that
considers only the data points close to the boundary to be important. In this method two samples,
EiandEj, belonging to two different classes are considered together with the distance D(Ei,Ej)
between them. The Tomek Link method states that if there does not exist an example E0such
thatD(Ei,E0)< D (Ei,Ej)orD(Ej,E0)< D (Ei,Ej)then pair (Ei,Ej)is a Tomek Link.
The formation of a Tomek Link implies the existence of a noisy example or else examples on
the borderline (Anwar, 2012). The majority class examples in such Tomek Links are removed to
address the class imbalance problem.
Laurikkala (2001) proposes the NCL method which utilizes three nearest neighbours for each
example (Ei) in the training dataset. When Eibelongs to the majority class, and its three nearest
neighbours have a different class, then Eiis removed. However, if Eibelongs to the minority class
and its three nearest neighbours are different than those neighbours that belong to the majority
class, then they are removed. The drawback of this method is that it can lead to an enormous
number of computations when the input dataset is large and comprises a large number of majority
class instances (Chawla, 2005). Anwar (2012) highlights another drawback in the ENN and NCL
methods, which is class overlapping. The author states that when the degree of class overlapping
in the training set is high, then the classiﬁer built will be poor in terms of predictive accuracy, as
the majority class examples situated close to the decision boundaries will be deleted. Tomek Links
is similar to NCL in that it may lead to performance deterioration of the classiﬁers when the input
dataset is large and with a high degree of overlapping among class values.
Johnson & Khoshgoftaar (2019) surveyed different approaches to class imbalance related to
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks The authors studied unstructured datasets such as images and text.
Their research addressed issues related to experimental design, implementation and evaluation of
deep learning techniques in applications that are linked with data imbalance such as medical diag-
nosis and fraud detection, among others. Challenges related to complexity, output format, results
and learning mechanisms have been discussed in the survey especially within the context of deep
learning. The authors concluded that the class imbalance problem has not been sufﬁciently covered
within deep learning and believed their approach could help improve the performance when the
input data is imbalanced. Katip (2019) proposed an under-sampling technique based on consensus
clustering to improve performance of imbalanced datasets. In using this approach, observations
linked with the dominant class in the training dataset are under-sampled using the consensus clus-
tering algorithm. Several different small imbalanced datasets and two large datasets were utilized
5
         
         
to test the new under-sampling technique. In the experiments, different classiﬁcation algorithms
including Nave Bayes and Regression among others have been used to derive classiﬁers and show
the impact of the proposed under-sampling technique. The results reported by the classiﬁcation
algorithms when using the consensus clustering method in the pre-processing phase yielded better
predictive accuracy on the datasets when compared to not using sampling techniques.
3.1.2. Oversampling
Oversampling is another common sampling approach used to deal with an imbalanced class
problem. Various oversampling strategies are available including random oversampling, focused
oversampling, and synthetic sampling (Estabrooks, Jo, & Japkowicz, 2004; Chawla et al., 2002;
Kubat & Matwin, 1997). The method in which the instances of the minority class are randomly
replicated until they have equal representation is known as random oversampling (Buda, 2017).
Random oversampling has two major shortcomings: it increases the possibility of overﬁtting of
the classiﬁer on the training dataset, and if the original data already has high dimensionality, it
mounts the computation cost thus increasing the training time of the classiﬁer (Chawla, 2005). In
focused oversampling, only those minority class values with samples occurring on the boundary
between the majority and minority class values are resampled. However, Chawla et al., (2002)
state that these methods of oversampling by replication lead to a more speciﬁc decision region
of the minority class. To overcome this and broaden this decision region, they propose an ad-
vanced heuristic oversampling technique called the Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique
(SMOTE). SMOTE is a technique in which oversampling of the minority class is carried out by
generating synthetic examples. These new synthetic minority class examples are the result of in-
terpolation between closely located minority class samples. Chawla et al., (2002) describe the
process of SMOTE as calculating the nearest same-class neighbours for every minority example
and then based on the required oversampling rate, randomly choosing from these neighbouring
examples. The synthetic examples are then generated at random points along the line segments
joining the minority examples with these chosen neighbours. This process expands the decision re-
gion pertaining to the minority class. The authors tested SMOTE on a wide variety of datasets with
different training sizes and degree of imbalance. It was observed that the larger and less speciﬁc
decision regions of SMOTE resulted in this method outperforming oversampling by replacement.
3.2. Algorithm-Driven Approach
In this approach, the classiﬁcation algorithm is adjusted to facilitate the learning task speciﬁ-
cally with respect to the minority class. In this approach, no changes are made to the input data
distribution. This approach includes cost sensitive learning, thresholding, and hybrid methods like
ensemble learners among others.
3.2.1. Cost-Sensitive Learning
The basic assumption by any traditional classiﬁcation algorithm is that there is a cost of mis-
classiﬁcation is the same for all response variable values (Chawla, 2005; Fan, Stolfo, Zhang, &
Chan, 1999). However, in real world applications the cost of misclassiﬁcation may vary among
target class values. For example, in the ﬁeld of medical diagnosis predicting that a person suffers
from a particular disease when he does not will lead to more medical examinations. On other hand,
6
         
         
misclassifying a person as healthy when he actually suffers from the disease can lead to excessive
health costs and potential fatality. In this situation, the cost of misclassiﬁcation is higher, so the
classiﬁer ought to be sensitive to the type of application and more importantly the cost associated
with misclassiﬁcation (Radwan, 2017; Buda, 2017). To address this issue, cost-sensitive learning
was proposed, so if the underlying dataset has a class ratio of 1:3 favouring the majority class,
then the misclassifying cost for the minority class will be three times that of the majority class
(Japkowicz & Stephen, 2002). An important concept in cost-sensitive learning is the Cost Matrix
(Buda, 2017) which comprises the average cost of misclassiﬁcation for each available class. The
goal of this method is to minimize misclassiﬁcation cost by choosing a class with minimum con-
ditional risk (Kotsiantis et al., 2006). The layout of the cost matrix is depicted in Table 1 below,
whereλijis the cost of misclassifying a sample from True Class jto Classi.
Table 1: Cost Matrix
Prediction
Class i Class j
TrueClass i 0λij
Class jλji 0
The diagonal entries indicate correct classiﬁcation, hence the cost associated with this is zero.
Other common cost-sensitive learning models are MetaCost which is a wrapper method of making
the classiﬁer cost sensitive, and AdaCost which is a cost-sensitive version of AdaBoost (Radwan,
2017; Guo et al., 2008).
3.2.2. Thresholding Methods
Thresholding is a method used to address the problem of class imbalance in classiﬁcation at the
algorithmic level. Buda (2017) deﬁnes the set of methods used in a classiﬁer to adjust the decision
boundary as threshold moving or the post-scaling method. Certain algorithms, like Nave Bayes,
generate probability estimates that are converted into predictions by cutting off at the threshold
which is usually 0.5 (Radwan, 2017). The predicted class label depends on the associated proba-
bility lying above or below the threshold. However, when the class is imbalanced the performance
of many classiﬁers is affected and thus the decision threshold of the classiﬁers needs to be adjusted
such that the cost of misclassiﬁcations is reduced, and the prediction performance is improved.
Zou, Xie, Lin, Wu & Ju, (2016) obtain the decision threshold by greedily adjusting the F-score.
The derived probabilities are evaluated to calculate the training set threshold with the best F-score
using cross validation. Thereby, the threshold for the test data is determined using Equation 1
Thresholdtest = (Maxtrain −Thresholdtrain
Maxtrain −Mintrain)×(Maxtest −Mintest ) (1)
3.2.3. Hybrid Methods
Ensemble learning approach, which is a combination of multiple classiﬁers derived from the
training dataset samples, is another alternative to deal with data imbalance. Thereafter, the results
of these classiﬁers are combined to get the ﬁnal decision of the classiﬁcation (Yan, Liu, Jin &
7
         
         
Hauptmann, 2003). The underlying success is that the base classiﬁers often have a diverse princi-
ple involved in its construction. Each component classiﬁer is built on certain assumptions and has
certain characteristics. However, when these components are combined, the individual variances
are averaged out thus leading to a reduction in the variance of the ensemble and improvement in
its generalization ability and performance (Sun et al., 2009). AdaBoost is one common ensemble
learning method which achieves variance reduction (Freund & Schapire 1997). Sun et al., (2009)
describes AdaBoost as a combination of up sampling and down sampling. At the onset, the weights
for all the classes are set the same. Every time the classiﬁer misclassiﬁes a test instance, the weight
associated with the misclassiﬁed class is increased. The weights assigned thus are representative
of the importance of the speciﬁc class. This approach focuses the attention of the weak learner
on important instances of the training dataset that often tend to get classiﬁed incorrectly, thereby
increasing its classiﬁcation accuracy. Friedman, Hastie, & Tibshirani (2000) show that AdaBoost
is immune to overﬁtting and has the capability of reducing bias. These features of AdaBoost make
it apt for dealing with the class imbalance problem. When the weights added are made cost sen-
sitive, a new system called AdaCost is developed which produces lower cost of misclassiﬁcation
and thus performs better than AdaBoost (Fan et al., 1999).
SMOTEBoost is another combination of boosting learners and sampling technique. It focuses
on increasing the classiﬁcation accuracy of the minority class while keeping intact the accuracy
of the underlying dataset (Buda, 2017). Unlike the oversampling methods which tend to overﬁt
the data, this method adds new synthetic examples of the minority class using SMOTE at each
boosting iteration (He & Garcia, 2009). The resulting ﬁnal classiﬁer has a broad decision region
for the minority class and is consequently well-deﬁned (He & Garcia, 2009). SMOTEBoost is
shown to outperform boosting and the AdaCost when tested over several datasets (Chawla, 2005).
4. Experimental Analysis
This section discusses the setting of the experiments, datasets, and classiﬁcation methods used
to generate the results. The primary aim of this section is to investigate the effects of varying im-
balance ratios on classiﬁer performance. The task can be accomplished by conducting thorough
experiments on multiple classiﬁcation datasets using different class ratios. For each dataset, mul-
tiple samples with different class ratios is produced, then for each sample a classiﬁcation method
will be applied to derive a classiﬁer. Finally, the performance of these classiﬁers is contrasted
according to different evaluation metrics to seek the behaviour of these results in different class
ratio scenarios.
4.1. Data and Experimental Setting
The experiments with different class ratios are implemented in Java and then integrated into the
Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis Environment (WEKA 3.9) to facilitate analysis of
the results. All classiﬁer experiments are also conducted in WEKA 3.9 environment (Hall, et al.,
2009). The experiments have been run on a computing machine with 2.5 Ghz processor and 8 GB
RAM. We employ Nave Bayes as the base classiﬁer for our experiments due to is efﬁciency and
reliability (Duda & Hart, 1973). Nave Bayes is a probabilistic model that calculates the likelihood
of a class label given a feature vector based on simpliﬁed Bayes theorem. Concretely, the Nave
8
         
         
Bayes method assumes conditional independence of feature values given the class label which
allows for simpliﬁed probability calculations. Thus, there is no need to build a complete classi-
ﬁcation model. Nave Bayes is shown to perform competitively against more complex methods.
The Nave Bayes algorithm implemented in this research assumes a multinomial distribution and
it uses the default values of the WEKA platform.
We measure the performance of the classiﬁers derived by Nave Bayes on multiple versions of
each dataset considered and according to various class ratios. The outcome of these performance
measurements will provide us with a clear picture on the overall impact of class imbalance on
the classiﬁcation dataset. Every experiment is carried out using 10-fold cross validation (Kohavi,
1995). Cross validation consists of splitting the data into 10 equal parts with 9 parts used in the
training phase and the remaining part employed in testing. The same process is repeated 10 times
to produce the average error rate of the 10 runs.
We employ ﬁve datasets, available from the University of California Irvine (UCI) repository,
to carry out our numerical experiments. The datasets are chosen to represent a diverse array of
applications. Table 2 depicts the selected datasets characteristics including number of attributes,
number of examples, any missing values, any continuous value, and class imbalance ratio. To
implement our study datasets with different degrees of imbalance with respect to the target class
are selected. We perform 100 runs per class ratio for each dataset. The results are averaged
using different samples of 10-fold cross validation. In other words, for a single class ratio of a
dataset 100 different runs were conducted using stratiﬁed 10-fold cross validation. We report the
average error rate, predictive accuracy, recall, and precision results among others, derived by the
Nave Bayes classiﬁcation algorithm. The same process is repeated across different class ratios
for all datasets. The class ratios considered for are 10%:90%, 20%:80%, 30%:70%, 40%:60%,
50%:50%, 60%:40%, 70%:30%, 80%:20%, and 90%:10%. These ratios are generated based on
experimental shufﬂing of different random seeds per given dataset with stratiﬁcation.
Table 2: The Datasets Description
Dataset # of ex # of attr # of labels Missing Cont Ratio (%)
0 Cleve 303 11 2 Yes No 54.45:45.55
1 Colic 368 22 2 Yes Yes 63.04:36.06
2 Credit-German 1000 20 2 No Yes 70:30
3 Diabetes 768 8 2 No Yes 65.10:34.90
4 Hepatitis 155 19 2 Yes Yes 79.35:20.65
We measure the classiﬁer performance based on a set of evaluation metrics derived from the
binary confusion matrix presented in Table 3. Concretely, we employ True Positive (TP), False
Positive (FP), True Negative (TN), and False Negative (FN) counts as basis for computing the
error rate, accuracy, recall and precision of the classiﬁer. TP, FP, FN, and TN are explained brieﬂy
below:
•TP: Number of examples that are predicted to be positive which are actually positive.
•FP: Number of examples that are predicted to be positive which are actually negative.
9
         
         
•FN: Number of examples that are predicted to be negative which are actually positive.
•TN: Number of examples that are predicted to be negative which are actually negative.
Table 3: Binary confusion matrix
Predicted class
True class Positive Negative
Positive TP FN
Negative FP TN
The evaluation measures adopted are
•Error rate : The fraction of incorrectly classiﬁed instances:
Error rate = 1−tp+tn
tp+tn+fp+fn(2)
•Predictive Accuracy : The fraction of correctly classiﬁed instances:
Predictive accuracy =tp+tn
tp+tn+fp+fn(3)
•Recall : The proportion of total relevant outcomes correctly predicted by the learning algo-
rithm:
Recall =tp
tp+fn(4)
•Precision : The proportion of the outcomes that are relevant:
Precision =tp
tp+fp(5)
4.1.1. Results Analysis
The impact of class imbalance on the error rate for the surveyed datasets is shown in Figures 1a-
1f. Thex-axis in the ﬁgures indicates the fraction of the ﬁrst class label in the sampled dataset. The
y-axis indicates the mean error rate of the Nave Bayes classiﬁer. The mean error rate is calculated
based on 100 runs using 10-fold stratiﬁed cross validation. As shown in Figures 1a-1f, the results
reveal the high impact of imbalance of the response variable on the error rate the classiﬁer. It
is apparent in the results that when the dataset is unbalanced with respect to the class label, the
error rate of the derived classiﬁers is lower than when the same dataset is balanced (50%:50%).
In Figures 1a-1c, the error rate is at maximum when the class ratio is 50%:50%. Furthermore,
the error rates are at the minimum when the class ratio is 10%:90% and then start to increase
exponentially until the ratio reaches 50%:50%. Afterwards, the error rate starts to decrease until it
again reaches the minimum when the class ratio becomes 90%:10%. However, Figure 1c depicts
10
         
         
that there is slight change in the behaviour of the error rate as it reaches its maximum value when
the class ratio is 30%:70%; it then starts to decrease until it reaches its minimum value at the class
ratio of 90%:10%. In fact, the more the dataset is imbalanced, the better the performance. These
results are likely due to the high fraction of the majority class which has a positive impact on the
overall error rate while not necessarily accurate on the minority class. These results, if limited,
reveal that class imbalance impacts the performance of the classiﬁers derived in terms of error rate.
(a) Credit-German and Cleve Datasets
(b) Pima and Hepatitis Datasets
(c) Horse Colic Dataset
Figure 1: Error Rate Results for Different Class Percentages
Figures 2a-2c depict precision results obtained from the surveyed datasets using different class
ratios. The results demonstrate that the highest precision rate is obtained when either the class
ratios in the dataset is 90%:10% or 10%:90%, and the lower precision rate is achieved when the
dataset is totally balanced, i.e. 50%:50%. The results are consistent across all the datasets. For
example, in the Cleve dataset the precision drops from 91.32% to 86.99% to 85.09% as the class
ratio increases from 10%:90% to 20%:80% to 30%:70%. The decrease of precision continues
until the dataset becomes balanced at the class ratio 50%:50%. At this ratio, the precision is at its
minimum, i.e. 82.27%. Afterwards, the precision rate starts to increase when the ﬁrst class fraction
becomes 60%. The increasing pattern continues until the ﬁrst class fraction becomes 90%. At that
11
         
         
class ratio, the precision derived is 89.97%. The same pattern in terms of relationship between
precision and class ratios is observed in the remaining datasets with slight differences in the degree
of decrement or increment. To be exact, in the Pima and Credit-German datasets, the increase or
decrease of precision rate with respect to class ratios is not highly signiﬁcant when compared to
the remaining datasets.
(a) Credit-German and Cleve Datasets
(b) Pima and Hepatitis Datasets
(c) Horse Colic Dataset
Figure 2: Precision Results for Different Class Percentages
Figures 3a-3c show the recall results obtained from the surveyed datasets. The reported results
are consistent with error rate and precision results obtained earlier and clearly reveal that class
ratio affects the performance of the derived classiﬁers. For example, in the Hepatitis dataset, the
recall rate is around 90% when the response variable is highly imbalanced, i.e. when class ratios
are 10%:90% and 90%:10%. On the other hand, the recall rate is the lowest at 81.74% when the
data sample is balanced at 50%:50%. The same pattern can be seen in all considered datasets with
the exception for the Horse-colic dataset in which the lowest recall obtained is at the class ratio of
30%:70%.
Figure 4 shows the weighted AUC results obtained on two of the surveyed datasets - Credit-
12
         
         
(a) Credit-German and Cleve Datasets
(b) Pima and Hepatitis Datasets
(c) Horse Colic Dataset
Figure 3: Recall Results for Different Class Percentages
German and Hepatitis - over a range of class ratios. The weighted AUC results obtained from
the Hepatitis dataset are above 0.9. The results are consistent across different class ratios which
points to high accuracy. On the other hand, the weighted AUC results obtained by the Nave Bayes
classiﬁer on the German-Credit dataset are only acceptable as they are around 80%.
Figure 4: Weighted AUC Results for the Credit- German and Hepatitis Datasets
13
         
         
4.1.2. Autism Detection Application Results with Resampling Techniques
In this section, we consider an imbalanced medical dataset related to Autism Spectrum Dis-
order (ASD), which refers to a range of neurodevelopmental disorders that are characterised by
slowed or restricted development (Thabtah, 2017b). The core symptoms of ASD are typically
associated with the ability to communicate and use other methods of social interaction with oth-
ers. Screening tests can be used to identify individuals that may have autistic traits. Typically, a
screening test is in a form of questionnaire whereby the individual (or someone acting on their
behalf) answers questions before receiving a score derived from their answers. The data used in
our study is taken from the ASDTest (Thabtah, 2017a). The app has four questionnaires based on
the age range of the individual taking the test. The chosen dataset is related to the Adult ASD test,
for individuals 17 years and older.
Table 4 presents all the features of the autism dataset under consideration. A1 A10 represent
the ten questions in the screening test related to Autism Quotient (AQ-10) method (Allison, et
al., 2012). Each question has four possible answers: Deﬁnitely Agree, Slightly Agree, Slightly
Disagree and Deﬁnitely Disagree. Depending on the answer each question is scored as 1 or 0 (1
being associated with autistic traits). A ﬁnal score is derived from the 10 questions with the score
of six or more indicating the presence of autistic traits. The original dataset contains 23 attributes, 6
of which are omitted in our experimentation as they are less signiﬁcant and have no direct impact
on the learning process of the classiﬁer (Thabtah, et al., 2018). The total score is also omitted
as it is directly correlated with the class prediction, and its inclusion may result in an overﬁtted
model. The dataset includes 1118 instances, 53.3% of which are male and 46.7% are females.
The median age of an individual in the dataset is 28. Nearly half (47%) of the individuals identify
as White European ethnicity, followed by middle eastern and Asian, which make up 19% and
15% respectively. There are 358 instances associated with class YES (exhibiting ASD symptoms)
which represents 32% of the dataset. The dataset is, therefore, deemed imbalanced with respect to
the class label.
Figure 5a depicts recall and precision rates over a range of different class ratios derived by Nave
Bayes classiﬁcation algorithm from the Adult Autism dataset. The ﬁgures clearly demonstrate the
largest recall and precision when the dataset is highly imbalanced particularly at 10%:90% and
90%:10% ratios. The performance of the derived classiﬁer maintains high recall and precision
rates of 97% even when the dataset is completely balanced at 50%:50%. The difference in results
on recall and precision rates between the highly imbalanced (10%:90%) and balanced (50%:50%)
sets is around 2%. Comparing these ﬁndings with the previous results derived by the same algo-
rithm from the ﬁve classiﬁcation datasets in Section 4.2.2, we discover the Adult Autism dataset
to be less sensitive to data imbalance. Nevertheless, we observe similar patterns in terms of sensi-
tivity and precision as before.
The weighted AUC is plotted in Figure 5b over a range of different class ratios for the Adult
Autism dataset. The results of weighted AUC clearly show high accuracy in the ASD classiﬁca-
tion. In particular, the AUC is around 0.99 regardless of the class ratio used for data processing.
We attribute these ﬁndings to having enough cases and controls in the Adult Autism dataset which
enables the Nave Bayes algorithm to develop a more generalizable model that is less sensitive to
data imbalance.
We conduct an experiment to measure the effects of two resampling techniques on the perfor-
14
         
         
Table 4: Confusion Matrix for the Binary Classiﬁcation Problem
Attribute Description Type
A1 I often notice small sounds when others do not Binary
A2 I usually concentrate more on the whole picture, rather than the small details Binary
A3 I ﬁnd it easy to do more than one thing at once Binary
A4 If there is an interruption, I can switch back to what I was doing very quickly Binary
A5 I ﬁnd it easy to read between the lines when someone is talking to me Binary
A6 I know how to tell if someone listening to me is getting bored Binary
A7 When I’m reading a story, I ﬁnd it difﬁcult to work out the characters’ intentions Binary
A8 I like to collect information about categories of things Binary
A9 I ﬁnd it easy to work out what someone is thinking by their face Binary
A10 I ﬁnd it difﬁcult to work out people’s intentions Binary
Age Age of user Numeric
Sex Male or Female Character
Ethnicity List of common ethnicities - text format String
Jaundice Whether the case was born with jaundice Boolean
Family ASD Whether anyone in immediate family has ASD Boolean
Score Score by AQ-10-Adult. Score greater than 3 indicates autistic traits Numeric
(a) Recall and precision results for the adult autism datasets
(b) Weighted area under curve (AUC) desults
for the Adult Autism dataset
Figure 5: Recall results for different class percentages
15
         
         
mance of the Naive Bayes classiﬁer applied to the Adult Autism dataset. Random Under-sampling
(RUS) is a resampling technique whereby the majority class in the dataset is reduced to match the
size of the minority class instances (Fernndez et al., 2017). This reduction occurs by random
deletion of instances in the majority class. Oversampling techniques such as Synthetic Minority
Oversampling technique (SMOTE) involve increasing the number of minority class observations
in the training set to balance the class ratio (Chawla et al., 2002). Concretely, SMOTE creates the
new instances of the minority class by randomly interpolating between the existing instances of
the minority class.
Our ﬁndings are presented in Table 5. The results obtained after applying RUS demonstrate a
slight increase in the recall of the models derived by the Nave Bayes algorithm. More importantly,
the results derived after applying SMOTE show an increase in both the precision and recall of the
classiﬁcation models. Note that the F1-score is also increased after applying SMOTE.
Table 5: Confusion Matrix for the Binary Classiﬁcation Problem
Precision Recall F1 AUC-ROC
No Resampling 0.94 0.93 0.94 0.99
Random Under-sampling 0.94 0.94 0.94 0.99
SMOTE 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.99
Recall is an important measure when dealing with medical datasets and classiﬁcation problems.
A higher recall indicates smaller chance of false negatives which could see an individual, who is
on the autism spectrum, be misdiagnosed and thus not followed up with any treatment or further
assessment by a medical professional.
AUC represents the probability that a classiﬁer will rank a randomly chosen positive instance
higher than a randomly chosen negative sample. In our case it translates to how well the model can
identify individuals that are on the ASD versus those who are not. The models results with respect
to the AUC metric are high particularly when resampling techniques are used to balance the Adult
Autism dataset. The resulting modelis expected to rank a randomly chosen positive sample above
a negative one 99% of the time.
5. Conclusion
Class imbalance is one of the key issues in classiﬁcation tasks. Machine learning algorithms
focus on maximizing the total accuracy over the entire dataset leading to more attention being
paid to the majority class samples. As a result the minority class samples are poorly predicted
by the learning model. We study the class imbalance problem in classiﬁcation by experimentally
applying a probabilistic classiﬁcation algorithm over a range of different class ratios. In particular,
we carried out a large number of experiments on various datasets using Naive Bayes classiﬁer.
We employed a range of evaluation metrics implemented in Java and embedded within the WEKA
platform. The bases for the comparison are average error rate, average recall, and average precision
which are calculated over 100 runs for each class ratio and dataset to ensure consistency and
statistical signiﬁcance. The reported results clearly reveal that for the majority of datasets the
16
         
         
evaluation metrics are at their minimum values when the datasets are balanced (50%:50%). The
highest evaluation metric values are derived when the dataset is imbalanced, i.e. 10%:90% or
90%:10%, which can be due to higher certainty in the available variables with respect to the
response variable. Nevertheless, these results could be biased as the instances within the dataset
are linked with a majority class, and hence treating instances of both class labels in terms of
classiﬁcation cost in the evaluation phase could be unfair and cause a performance boost for the
majority class.
The main novelty and contribution of the paper is the study of the precise nature of the rela-
tionship between the degree of class imbalance and the corresponding classiﬁer performance. This
is a little explored topic. Although many are aware that class imbalance causes problems there are
not any in depth studies about its precise effects. We conduct extensive experiments to highlight
the effects of changing class imbalance on classiﬁer performance. We hope that by learning more
about the exact effects of class imbalance on classiﬁer performance researchers can better tackle
the problem. We are also ﬁrst to measure the effects of class imbalance ratio in behavioural appli-
cations such as autism spectrum disorder screening. In addition to measuring effects of changing
class ratio on medical applications we have experimentally contrasted different data resampling
methods to seek which one can alleviate classiﬁcation performance for different classiﬁcation ap-
plications including ASD screening. We hope our work will open the door into enhancing the
design of ASD screening systems to reduce false negative predictions.
In the near future, we will measure the impact of data sparsity on the classiﬁcation performance
for datasets with class imbalance. This is necessary because when data is sparse there will be a
large number of attribute values that are zero. Reducing the dimensionality of these datasets before
constructing classiﬁers by machine learning algorithms becomes essential especially for datasets
which suffer from data imbalance. The study will be of considerable interest for data scientists,
researchers in data science and information theory among others.
References
[1] F. Bryant and A. Satorra, ”Principles and practice of scaled difference chi-square testing,” Structural Equation
Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal 19(3)(2012) 372-398.
[2] Abdelhamid, N., Ayesh, A., & Thabtah, F. (2013). Phishing detection using associative classiﬁcation data min-
ing. ICAI’13 - The 2013 International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. (491-499). USA.
[3] Ali, A., Shamsuddin, S. M., & Ralescu, A. L. (2015). Classiﬁcation with class imbalance problem: A re-
view. International Journal of Advances in Soft Computing and its Applications, 7(3), 176-204. Retrieved from
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/1e48/70524f8de44d4f18c8f9f80eb797dfd25c89.pdf
[4] Allison, C., Auyeung, B., and Baron-Cohen, S. (2012). Toward brief red ﬂags for autism screening: the short
autism spectrum quotient and the short quantitative checklist for autism in toddlers in 1,000 cases and 3,000
controls [corrected]. Journal of American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 202-212.
[5] AlShboul, R., Thabtah, F., Abdelhamid, N. & Al-diabat, M. (2018) A visualization cybersecurity method based
on features dissimilarity. Computers & Security 77, 289-303.
[6] Anwar, M. N. (2012). Complexity measurement for dealing with class imbalance problems in classiﬁcation
modelling. Thesis for Doctor of Philosophy, Massey University, Institute of Fundamental Sciences.
[7] Belarouci, S., & Chikh, M. A. (2017). Medical imbalanced data classiﬁcation. Advances in Science, Technology
and Engineering Systems Journal, 2(3), 116-124.
[8] Boyle, T. (2018). Dealing with imbalanced data: A guide to effectively handling imbalanced datasets in Python.
17
         
         
[9] Buda, M. (2017). A systematic study of the class imbalance problem in convolutional neural networks. Kth
Royal Institute of Technology, School of Computer Science and Communication, Sweden.
[10] Buda, M., Maki, A., & Mazurowski, M. A. (2018). A systematic study of the class imbalance problem in
convolutional neural networks. Neural Networks, 106, 249-259.
[11] Chawla, N. V . (2005). Data mining for imbalanced datasets: An overview. In O. Maimon, & L. Rokach, Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery Handbook (pp. 853-867). Boston: Springer.
[12] Chawla, N. V ., Bowyer, K., Hall, L. O., & Kegelmeyer, W. P. (2002). SMOTE: Synthetic minority over-sampling
technique. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 16(1), 321-357.
[13] Duda, R. O. & Hart P. E. (1973). Pattern classiﬁcation and scene analysis. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
[14] Estabrooks, A., Jo, T., & Japkowicz, N. (2004). A multiple resampling method for learning from imbalanced
data sets. Computational Intelligence, 20(1), 18-36.
[15] Fan, W., Stolfo, S. J., Zhang, J., & Chan, P. K. (1999). AdaCost: Misclassiﬁcation cost-sensitive boosting. Pro-
ceedings of the Sixteenth International Conference on Machine Learning (pp. 97-105). San Francisco: Morgan
Kaufmann.
[16] Fernndez, A., Ro, S. d., Chawla, N. V ., & Herrera, F. (2017). An insight into imbalanced Big Data classiﬁcation:
outcomes and challenges. Complex & Intelligent Systems.
[17] Friedman, J., Hastie, T., & Tibshirani, R. (2000). Additive logistic regression: A statistical view of boosting.
The Annals of Statistics, 28(2), 337-407.
[18] Freund, Y . & Schapire, R. E. (1997) A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learning and an application
to boosting. Journal of Computer and System Sciences. 55: 119139.
[19] Guo, X., Yin, Y ., Dong, C., Yang, G., & Zhou, G. (2008). On the class imbalance problem. 2008 Fourth Inter-
national Conference on Natural Computation (pp. 192-201). Jinan, China: IEEE.
[20] Hall, M., Frank, E., Holmes G., Pfahringer B., Reutemann P. & Witten I. (2009) The WEKA data mining
software: An update; SIGKDD explorations, 11(1).
[21] Hart, P. E. (1968). The condensed nearest neighbor rule. IEEE transactions on information theory, 14(5) 15-5
16.
[22] He, H. & Garcia, E. A. (2009). Learning from imbalanced data. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering, 21, pp. 1263 -1284. IEEE.
[23] Huang, C., Li, Y ., Loy, C. C., & Tang, X. (2018). Deep imbalanced learning for face recognition and attribute
prediction. Arxiv.
[24] Hulse, J., Khoshgoftaar, T., & Napolitano, A. (2007). Experimental perspectives on earning from imbalanced
data. Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Machine Learning (pp. 935-942). Corvalis, Oregon,
USA: Oregon State University.
[25] Japkowicz, N., & Stephen, S. (2002). The class imbalance problem: A systematic study. Intelligent Data Anal-
ysis, 6(5), 429-449.
[26] Johnson JM, Khoshgoftaar TM. Survey on deep learning with class imbalance. J Big Data. 2019;6(1):27.
[27] Kohavi, R. (1995). A study of cross-validation and bootstrap for accuracy estimation and model selection. Pro-
ceedings of the Fourteenth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence. San Mateo, CA: Morgan
Kaufmann. 2 (12): 11371143.
[28] Kubat, M. & Matwin, S. (1997). Addressing the curse of imbalanced training sets: One-sided selection. In pro-
ceedings of the Fourteenth Intemational Conference on Machine Learning, pages 179-186, Nashville, Tennesse.
Morgan Kaufmann.
[29] Kotsiantis, S., Kanellopoulos, D., & Pintelas, P. (2006). Handling imbalanced datasets: A review. GESTS Inter-
national Transactions on Computer Science and Engineering, 30.
[30] Laurikkala, J. (2001). Improving identiﬁcation of difﬁcult small classes by balancing class distribution. Confer-
ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine in Europe (pp. 63-66). Portugal: Springer.
[31] Liu, Y ., Loh, H. T., Youcef-Toumi, K., & Tor, S. B. (2007). Handling of imbalanced data in text classiﬁcation:
Category-based term weights. In A. Kao, & S. R. Poteet, Natural Language Processing and Text Mining (pp.
171-192). London: Springer.
[32] Longadge, R., Dongre, S. S., & Malik, L. (2013). Class imbalance problem in data mining: Review. International
Journal of Computer Science and Network (IJCSN), 2(1).
18
         
         
[33] Nazrul, S. S. (2018). Fraud detection under extreme Ccass imbalance. Retrieved from
https://towardsdatascience.com/fraud-detection-under-extreme-class-imbalance-c241854e60ch
[34] Onan A. (2019) Consensus Clustering-Based Under-sampling Approach to Imbalanced Learning. Scientiﬁc Pro-
gramming. V olume 2019, Article ID 5901087.
[35] Ouyang, X. Q., Chen, Y . P., & Wei, B. H. (2017). Experimental study on class imbalance problem using an oil
spill training data set. British Journal of Mathematics & Computer Science, 21(5), 1-9.
[36] Prati, R. C., Batista, G. E., & Silva, D. F. (2015). Class imbalance revisited: a new experimental setup to assess
the performance of treatment methods. Knowledge and Information Systems, 45(1), 247-270.
[37] Radwan, A. M. (2017). Enhancing Prediction on Imbalance Data by Thresholding Technique with Noise Filter-
ing. 8th International Conference on Information Technology (ICIT) (pp. 399 - 404). IEEE. Enhancing prediction
on imbalance data by thresholding technique with noise
[38] Sun, Y ., Wong, A. K., & Kamel, M. S. (2009). Classiﬁcation of imbalanced data: A review. International Journal
of Pattern Recognition and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 23(4), 687719.
[39] Thabtah, F. (2018a). An accessible and efﬁcient autism screening method for behavioural data and predictive
analyses. Health Informatics Journal.
[40] Thabtah F. (2018b). Machine learning in autistic spectrum disorder behavioral research: A review and ways
forward Informatics for Health and Social Care 43,(2), 1-20.
[41] Thabtah, F., Kamalov, F., & Rajab, K. (2018). A new computational intelligence approach to detect autistic
features for autism screening. International Journal of Medical Infromatics, 117, pp. 112-124.
[42] Thabtah, F., & Peebles, D. (2019). A new machine learning model based on induction of rules for autism
detection. Health Informatics Journal, doi:1460458218824711. Thabtah, F. (2017a). ASDTest.
[43] Thabtah, F. (2017b). Machine learning in autistic spectrum disorder behavioral research: A review and ways
forward. INFORMATICS FOR HEALTH & SOCIAL CARE.
[44] Tomek, I. (1976). Two modiﬁcations of CNN. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 6(11), 769
- 772.
[45] Wilson, D. L. (1972). Asymptotic properties of nearest neighbor rules using edited data. IEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 2(3), 408 - 421.
[46] Yan, R., Liu, Y ., Jin, R., & Hauptmann, A. (2003). On predicting rare class with SVM ensemble in scene classi-
ﬁcation. 2003 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 2003. Proceedings.
(ICASSP ’03). 3. Hong Kong, China: IEEE.
[47] Yang, Q., & Wu, X. (2006). 10 Challenge problems in data mining research. International Journal of Information
Technology and Decision Making, 5(4), 597-604.
[48] Zou, Q., Xie, S., Lin, Z., Wu, M., & Ju, Y . (2016). Finding the best classiﬁcation threshold in imbalanced
classiﬁcation. Big Data Research.
[49] Zhu, B., Baesens, B., & vanden Broucke, S. K. (2017). An empirical comparison of techniques for the class
imbalance problem in churn prediction. Information sciences, 408, 84-99.
19
         
         
We declare that 
a. There is no conflict of interest 
b.  This  manuscript  is  the  authors'  original  work  and  has  not  been  published  nor  has  it  been  
submitted simultaneously elsewhere. 
b. All authors have checked the manuscript and have agreed to the submission.
         
         
