METRICS FOR MULTI -CLASS CLASSIFICATION :ANOVERVIEW
A W HITE PAPER
Margherita Grandini
CRIF S.p.A.
m.grandini@crif.comEnrico Bagli
CRIF S.p.A.Giorgio Visani
CRIF S.p.A.
Department of Computer Sciencey,
University of Bologna
August 14, 2020
ABSTRACT
Classiﬁcation tasks in machine learning involving more than two classes are known by the name of
"multi-class classiﬁcation". Performance indicators are very useful when the aim is to evaluate and
compare different classiﬁcation models or machine learning techniques. Many metrics come in handy
to test the ability of a multi-class classiﬁer. Those metrics turn out to be useful at different stage of
the development process, e.g. comparing the performance of two different models or analysing the
behaviour of the same model by tuning different parameters. In this white paper we review a list of
the most promising multi-class metrics, we highlight their advantages and disadvantages and show
their possible usages during the development of a classiﬁcation model.
1 Introduction
In the vast ﬁeld of Machine Learning, the general focus is to predict an outcome using the available data. The prediction
task is also called "classiﬁcation problem" when the outcome represents different classes, otherwise is called "regression
problem" when the outcome is a numeric measurement.
As regards to classiﬁcation, the most common setting involves only two classes, although there may be more than two.
In this last case the issue changes his name and is called "multi-class classiﬁcation".
From an algorithmic standpoint, the prediction task is addressed using the state of the art mathematical techniques.
There are many different solutions, however each one shares a common factor: they use available data ( Xvariables) to
obtain the best prediction ^Yof the outcome variable Y.
In Multi-class classiﬁcation, we may regard the response variable Yand the prediction ^Yas two discrete random
variables: they assume values in f1;; Kgand each number represents a different class.
The algorithm comes up with the probability that a speciﬁc unit belongs to one possible class, then a classiﬁcation rule
is employed to assign a single class to each individual. The rule is generally very simple, the most common rule assigns
a unit to the class with the highest probability.
A classiﬁcation model gives us the probability of belonging to a speciﬁc class for each possible units. Starting from the
probability assigned by the model, in the two-class classiﬁcation problem a threshold is usually applied to decide which
class has to be predicted for each unit. While in the multi-class case, there are various possibilities; among them, the
highest probability value and the softmax are the most employed techniques.
Performance indicators are very useful when the aim is to evaluate and compare different classiﬁcation models or
machine learning techniques.
CRIF S.p.A., via Mario Fantin 1-3, 40131 Bologna (BO), Italy
yUniversità degli Studi di Bologna, Dipartimento di Ingegneria e Scienze Informatiche, viale Risorgimento 2, 40136 Bologna
(BO), ItalyarXiv:2008.05756v1  [stat.ML]  13 Aug 2020
Metrics for Multi-Class Classiﬁcation: an Overview A W HITE PAPER
There are many metrics that come in handy to test the ability of any multi-class classiﬁer and they turn out to be useful
for: i) comparing the performance of two different models, ii) analysing the behaviour of the same model by tuning
different parameters.
Many metrics are based on the Confusion Matrix, since it encloses all the relevant information about the algorithm and
classiﬁcation rule performance.
1.1 Confusion Matrix
The confusion matrix is a cross table that records the number of occurrences between two raters, the true/actual
classiﬁcation and the predicted classiﬁcation, as shown in Figure 1. For consistency reasons throughout the paper, the
columns stand for model prediction whereas the rows display the true classiﬁcation.
The classes are listed in the same order in the rows as in the columns, therefore the correctly classiﬁed elements are
located on the main diagonal from top left to bottom right and they correspond to the number of times the two raters
agree.
Figure 1: Example of confusion matrix
In the following paragraphs, we review two-class classiﬁcation concepts, which will come in handy later to understand
multi-class concepts.
1.2 Precision & Recall
These metrics will act as building blocks for Balanced Accuracy and F1-Score formulas.
Starting from a two class confusion matrix:
Figure 2: Two-class Confusion Matrix
The Precision is the fraction of True Positive elements divided by the total number of positively predicted units (column
sum of the predicted positives). In particular, True Positive are the elements that have been labelled as positive by the
model and they are actually positive, while False Positive are the elements that have been labelled as positive by the
model, but they are actually negative.
Precision =TP
TP+FP(1)
2
Metrics for Multi-Class Classiﬁcation: an Overview A W HITE PAPER
Precision expresses the proportion of units our model says are Positive and they actually Positive. In other words,
Precision tells us how much we can trust the model when it predicts an individual as Positive.
The Recall is the fraction of True Positive elements divided by the total number of positively classiﬁed units (row sum
of the actual positives). In particular False Negative are the elements that have been labelled as negative by the model,
but they are actually positive.
Recall =TP
TP+FN(2)
The Recall measures the model’s predictive accuracy for the positive class: intuitively, it measures the ability of the
model to ﬁnd all the Positive units in the dataset.
Hereafter, we present different metrics for the multi-class setting, outlining pros and cons, with the aim to provide
guidance to make the best choice.
2 Accuracy
Accuracy is one of the most popular metrics in multi-class classiﬁcation and it is directly computed from the confusion
matrix.
Referring to Figure 2:
Accuracy =TP+TN
TP+TN+FP+FN(3)
The formula of the Accuracy considers the sum of True Positive and True Negative elements at the numerator and the
sum of all the entries of the confusion matrix at the denominator. True Positives and True Negatives are the elements
correctly classiﬁed by the model and they are on the main diagonal of the confusion matrix, while the denominator also
considers all the elements out of the main diagonal that have been incorrectly classiﬁed by the model.
In simple words, consider to choose a random unit and predict its class, Accuracy is the probability that the model
prediction is correct.
Referring to Figure 1:
Accuracy =6 + 9 + 10 + 12
52(4)
The same reasoning is also valid for the multi-class case.
Accuracy returns an overall measure of how much the model is correctly predicting on the entire set of data. The basic
element of the metric are the single individuals in the dataset: each unit has the same weight and they contribute equally
to the Accuracy value.
When we think about classes instead of individuals, there will be classes with a high number of units and others with
just few ones. In this situation, highly populated classes will have higher weight compared to the smallest ones.
Therefore, Accuracy is most suited when we just care about single individuals instead of multiple classes. The key
question is "Am I interested in a predicting the highest number of individuals in the right class, without caring about
class distribution and other indicators?". If the answer is positive, then the Accuracy is the right indicator.
A practical example is represented by imbalanced datasets (when most units are assigned to a single class): Accuracy
tends to hide strong classiﬁcation errors for classes with few units, since those classes are less relevant compared to the
biggest ones.
Using this metric, it is not possible to identify the classes where the algorithm is working worse.
3
Metrics for Multi-Class Classiﬁcation: an Overview A W HITE PAPER
On the other hand, the metric is very intuitive and easy to understand. Both in binary cases and multi-class cases the
Accuracy assumes values between 0and1, while the quantity missing to reach 1is called MisclassificationRate [5].
3 Balanced Accuracy
Balanced Accuracy is another well-known metric both in binary and in multi-class classiﬁcation; it is computed starting
from the confusion matrix.
Referring to Figure 2:
Balanced Accuracy =TP
Total row1+TN
Total row2
2(5)
Referring to Figure 1:
Balanced Accuracy =6
9+9
14+10
13+12
16
4(6)
The formula of the Balanced Accuracy is essentially an average of recalls. First we evaluate the Recall for each class,
then we average the values in order to obtain the Balanced Accuracy score. The value of Recall for each class answers
the question "how likely will an individual of that class be classiﬁed correctly?". Hence, Balanced Accuracy provides
an average measure of this concept, across the different classes.
If the dataset is quite balanced, i.e. the classes are almost the same size, Accuracy and Balanced Accuracy tend to
converge to the same value.
In fact, the main difference between Balanced Accuracy and Accuracy emerges when the initial set of data (i.e. the
actual classiﬁcation) shows an unbalanced distribution for the classes.
Figure 3: Imbalanced Dataset
Figure 3 shows how the actual classiﬁcation is unbalanced towards classes "b" and "c". For this setting, Accuracy value
is 0.689, whereas Balanced Accuracy is 0.615. The difference is mainly due to the weighting that recall applies on each
row/actual class. In this way each class has an equal weight in the ﬁnal calculation of Balanced Accuracy and each
class is represented by its recall, regardless of their size. Accuracy instead, mainly depends on the performance that the
algorithm achieves on the biggest classes. The performance on the smallest ones is less important, because of their low
weight.
Summarizing the two main steps of Balanced Accuracy, ﬁrst we compute a measure of performance (recall) for the
algorithm on each class, then we apply the arithmetic mean of these values to ﬁnd the ﬁnal Balanced Accuracy score.
All in all, Balanced Accuracy consists in the arithmetic mean of the recall of each class, so it is "balanced" because
every class has the same weight and the same importance.
A consequence is that smaller classes eventually have a more than proportional inﬂuence on the formula, although their
size is reduced in terms of number of units. This also means that Balanced Accuracy is insensitive to imbalanced class
4
Metrics for Multi-Class Classiﬁcation: an Overview A W HITE PAPER
distribution and it gives more weight to the instances coming from minority classes. On the other hand, Accuracy treats
all instances alike and usually favours the majority class [2].
This may be a perk if interested in having good prediction also for under-represented classes, or a drawback if we care
more about good prediction on the entire dataset.
The smallest classes when misclassiﬁed, are able to drop down the value of Balanced Accuracy, since they have the
same importance as largest classes have in the equation. For example, considering class "a" in the Figure 3, there are 57
misclassiﬁed elements and 5 elements which have been rightly predicted, for a total row of 62 elements belonging to
the class "a" observing the actual classiﬁcation. An amount of 57 elements have been assigned to other classes by the
model, in fact the recall for this small class is quite low (0.0806).
When the class presents a high number of individuals (i.e. class "c"), its bad performance is caught up also by the
Accuracy. Instead, when the class has just few individuals (i.e. class "a"), the model’s bad performance on this last
class cannot be caught up by Accuracy. If we are interested in achieving good predictions (i.e. class "b" and "d") also
for rare classes, the information of Balanced Accuracy guarantees to spot possible predictive problems also for the
under-represented classes.
3.1 Balanced Accuracy Weighted
The Balanced Accuracy Weighted takes advantage of the Balanced Accuracy formula multiplying each recall by the
weight of its class wk, namely the frequency of the class on the entire dataset. We add also the sum of the weights Wat
the denominator, with respect to the Balanced Accuracy.
Balanced Accuracy Weighted =PK
k=1TPk
Total rowkwk
KW(7)
Referring to Figure 1:
Balanced Accuracy Weighted =6
9wa+9
14wb+10
13wc+12
16wd
4W(8)
Once recalls have been weighted by the frequency of each class ( wk), the average of recall is no longer dirtied by low
frequency classes: large classes will have a proportional weight to their size, and small ones will have a resized effect,
compared with the Balanced Accuracy formula.
Since every recall is weighted by the class frequency of the initial dataset, Balanced Accuracy Weighted could be a
good performance indicator when the aim is to train a classiﬁcation algorithm on a wide number of classes. In fact,
this metric allows to keep separate algorithm performances on the different classes, so that we may track down which
class causes poor performance. At the same time, it keeps track of the importance of each class thanks to the frequency.
This ensures to obtain a reliable value of the overall performance on the dataset: we may interpret this metric as the
probability to correctly predict a given unit, even if the formula is slightly different from the Accuracy.
4 F1-Score
Also F1-Score assesses classiﬁcation model’s performance starting from the confusion matrix, it aggregates Precision
and Recall measures under the concept of harmonic mean.
F1-Score =2
precision 1+recall 1
= 2precisionrecall
precision +recall
(9)
The formula of F1-score can be interpreted as a weighted average between Precision and Recall, where F1-score reaches
its best value at 1 and worst score at 0. The relative contribution of precision and recall are equal onto the F1-score and
the harmonic mean is useful to ﬁnd the best trade-off between the two quantities [11].
The addends "Precision" and "Recall" could refer both to binary classiﬁcation and to multi-class classiﬁcation, as shown
in Chapter 1.2: in the binary case we only consider the Positive class (therefore the True Negative elements have no
5
Metrics for Multi-Class Classiﬁcation: an Overview A W HITE PAPER
importance), while in the multi-class case we consider all the classes one by one and, as a consequence, all the entries
of the confusion matrix.
To give some intuition about the F1-Score behaviour, we review the effect of the harmonic mean on the ﬁnal score.
It has been observed from previous studies that it gives large weight to smaller classes and it mostly rewards models
that have similar Precision and Recall values. As an example, we consider Model A with Precision equal to Recall
(80%), and Model B whose precision is 60% and recall is 100%. Arithmetically, the mean of the precision and recall is
the same for both models, but using the harmonic mean, i.e. computing the F1-Score, Model A obtains a score of 80%,
while Model B has only a score 75% [12].
Moreover, Precision and Recall take values in the range [0;1] and when one of them assumes values close to 0, the ﬁnal
F1-Score suffers a huge drop. In fact the harmonic mean tends to give more weight to lower values.
4.1 F1-Score Binary case
Referring to confusion matrix in Figure 2, since Precision and Recall do not consider the True Negative elements, we
calculate the binary F1-Score as follows:
Precision =20
30= 0:66 Recall =20
25= 0:80 (10)
F1-Score = 20:660:80
0:66 + 0 :80
= 0:72 (11)
The F1-Score for the binary case takes into account both Precision and Recall. Thanks to these metrics, we can be quite
conﬁdent that F1-Score will spot weak points of the prediction algorithm, if any of those points exists.
In our example a score of 0.72 demonstrates a quite good model ability in predicting the correct class.
4.2 F1-Score Multi-class case
When it comes to multi-class cases, F1-Score should involve all the classes. To do so, we require a multi-class measure
of Precision and Recall to be inserted into the harmonic mean. Such metrics may have two different speciﬁcations,
giving rise to two different metrics: Micro F1-Score and Macro F1-Score [9].
4.2.1 Macro F1-Score
In order to obtain Macro F1-Score, we need to compute Macro-Precision and Macro-Recall before. They are respectively
calculated by taking the average precision for each predicted class and the average recall for each actual class. Hence,
the Macro approach considers all the classes as basic elements of the calculation: each class has the same weight in the
average, so that there is no distinction between highly and poorly populated classes.
Figure 4: Macro-Precision and Macro-Recall
Class bis the reference and we show how to compute its Precision and Recall
For the required computations, we will use the Confusion Matrix focusing on one class at a time and labelling the tiles
accordingly. In particular, we consider True Positive (TP) as the only correctly classiﬁed units for our class, whereas
6
Metrics for Multi-Class Classiﬁcation: an Overview A W HITE PAPER
False Positive (FP) and False Negative (FN) are the wrongly classiﬁed elements on the column and the row of the class
respectively. True Negative (TN) are all the other tiles, as shown in Figure 4 where we are considering the class "b" as
reference focus.
When we switch from one class to another one, we compute the quantities again and the labels for the Confusion Matrix
tiles are changed accordingly.
Precision and Recall for each class are computed using the same formulas of the binary setting and the labelling, as
described above. The Formulas 12 and 13 represent the two quantities for a generic class k.
Precision k=TPk
TPk+FPk(12)
Recall k=TPk
TPk+FNk(13)
Macro Average Precision and Recall are simply computed as the arithmetic mean of the metrics for single classes.
MacroAveragePrecision =PK
k=1Precision k
K(14)
MacroAverageRecall =PK
k=1Recall k
K(15)
Eventually, Macro F1-Score is the harmonic mean of Macro-Precision and Macro-Recall:
Macro F1-Score = 2(MacroAveragePrecision MacroAverageRecall
MacroAveragePrecision 1+MacroAverageRecall 1) (16)
It is possible to derive some intuitions from the equation.
Macro-Average methods tend to calculate an overall mean of different measures, because the numerators of Macro
Average Precision and Macro Average Recall are composed by values in the range [0;1]. There is no link to the class
size, because classes with different size are equally weighted at the numerator. This implies that the effect of the
biggest classes have the same importance as small ones have. The obtained metric evaluates the algorithm from a class
standpoint: high Macro-F1 values indicate that the algorithm has good performance on all the classes, whereas low
Macro-F1 values refers to poorly predicted classes.
4.3 Micro F1-Score
In order to obtain Micro F1-Score, we need to compute Micro-Precision and Micro-Recall before.
The idea of Micro-averaging is to consider all the units together, without taking into consideration possible differences
between classes. Therefore, the Micro-Average Precision is computed as follows:
Micro Average Precision =PK
k=1TPkPK
k=1Total Column k=PK
k=1TPk
Grand Total(17)
What about the Micro-Average Recall? When we try to evaluate it, we observe the measure is exactly equal to the
Micro-Average Precision, in fact summing the two measures rely on the sum of the True Positives, whereas the
difference should be in the denominator: we consider the Column Total for the Precision calculation and the Row Total
for the Recall calculation. Although, using the units all together ends up in having the Grand Total in both the Formulas.
7
Metrics for Multi-Class Classiﬁcation: an Overview A W HITE PAPER
Micro Average Recall =PK
k=1TPkPK
k=1Total Row k=PK
k=1TPk
Grand Total(18)
Long story short, we may see that Micro-Average Precision and Recall are just the same values, therefore the Micro-
Average F1-Score is just the same as well (the harmonic mean of two equal values is just the value).
Micro Average F 1 =PK
k=1TPk
Grand Total(19)
Taking a look to the formula, we may see that Micro-Average F1-Score is just equal to Accuracy. Hence, pros and cons
are shared between the two measures. Both of them give more importance to big classes, because they just consider all
the units together. In fact a poor performance on small classes is not so important, since the number of units belonging
to those classes is small compared to the dataset size.
All in all, we may regard the Macro F1-Score as an average measure of the average precision and average recall of the
classes. This measure is calculated at class level, so that each class has the same weight. Small classes are equivalent to
big ones and the algorithm performance on them is equally important, regardless of the class size.
On the contrary, trying to reverse the concept and build the Micro F1-score, just give us the Accuracy Formula. So
that we have a new interpretation of the Accuracy as the average of Precision and Recall above the entire dataset.
The Accuracy, as stated above, is calculated at a dataset level and each unit has the same importance. Therefore, the
Accuracy gives different importance to different classes, based on their frequency in the dataset.
4.4 Cross Entropy
From a theoretical point of view, Cross-Entropy is used to evaluate the similarity between two distribution functions.
Consider two generic distributions p(x)andq(x), the Cross-Entropy is given by the formula 20-21, to respectively suit
continuous or discrete Xvariables.
H(p; q) = Z
Dxp(x) logq(x) (20)
H(p; q) = X
Dxp(x) logq(x) (21)
The metric compares the two distributions over the entire domain DXof the Xvariable and it only assumes positive
values. In particular, small values of the Cross-Entropy function denote very similar distributions.
In Multi-class classiﬁcation, we may regard the response variable Yand the prediction ^Yas two discrete random
variables: they assume values in f1;; Kgand each number represents a different class.
Considering the generic i-th unit of the dataset: it has speciﬁc values (x(i)
1;; x(i)
m)of theXvariables and the number
y(i)represents the class the unit belongs to. Since we only observe the true class, we consider the unit to have probability
equal to 1 for this class and probability equal to 0 for the remaining classes. Doing so, y(i)may be rewritten as a vector
of probabilities, as shown in Panel 5a. On the other hand, the algorithm prediction itself generates a numeric vector ^y(i),
with the probability for the i-th unit to belong to each class.
y(i)and^y(i)are generated respectively from the conditioned random variables YjXand^YjX. The conditioning reﬂects
the fact that we are considering a speciﬁc unit, with speciﬁc characteristics, namely the unit’s values for the Xvariables.
In the following ﬁgures we will regard respectively p(yi)andp(^yi)as the probability distributions of the conditioned
variables above. In Figure 5, a representation of the two distributions, for a ﬁctitious unit.
The Cross-Entropy for the i-th unit (Formula 22) is calculated between the true distribution p(yi)and the prediction
p(^yi).
8
Metrics for Multi-Class Classiﬁcation: an Overview A W HITE PAPER
(a) Distribution of YijX
 (b) Distribution of ^YijX
Figure 5
H(p(yi); p(^yi)) = KX
k=1p(Yi=kjXi) logp(^Yi=kjXi) (22)
Each class is considered in the formula above, however the quantity p(Yi=kjXi)is 0 for all the classes except the true
one, making all the terms but one disappear. Cross-Entropy exploits only the value of p(^Yi=kjXi)for the kvalue
representing the true class.
Eventually we consider the average of the Cross-Entropy values for the single units, to obtain a measure of agreement
on the entire dataset (Formula 23).
H(p(y); p(^y)) = NX
iKX
k=1p(Yi=kjXi) logp(^Yi=kjXi) (23)
It is worth noting that the technique does not rely on the Confusion Matrix, instead it employs directly the variables Y
and^Y. Therefore, Cross-Entropy does not evaluate the goodness of the classiﬁcation rule (the rule which translates the
probabilities into the predicted class).
From a practical perspective, Cross-Entropy is widely employed thanks to its fast calculation. Although, it takes into
account only the true class probability p(^yi=k)without caring about the probability mass distribution among the
remaining classes.
This may have some drawbacks, as shown in Figure 6: the i-th unit gets predicted by two different algorithms, obtaining
two distinct distributions. The true label is yi= 2, referring to the same unit of Figure 5.
The two algorithms have the same prediction for class 2, i.e. 0:4, but, substantially, they have different performance on
the aggregate perspective: in Panel 6a the highest probability class is 2, for 6b it is 6. Depending on the classiﬁcation
rule, the two algorithms are likely to assign different predicted classes to the unit.
Regardless of such differences, Cross-Entropy assigns the same value to each algorithm, since p(^yi= 2) is the same. In
our example, Panel 6a achieves right predictions and 6b a wrong one, without being reported by the Cross-Entropy.
5 Independence between two Random Discrete Variables
The last two metrics in this paper were built starting from the confusion matrix and relying on two different statistical
concepts. Matthews Correlation Coefﬁcient takes advantage of the Phi-Coefﬁcient [7], while Cohen’s Kappa Score
9
Metrics for Multi-Class Classiﬁcation: an Overview A W HITE PAPER
(a) Distribution of ^Y(1
ijX
 (b) Distribution of ^Y(2
ijX
Figure 6
relates to the probabilistic concept of dependence between two random variables. It will be demonstrated that both the
scores come up with a measure of how much the model’s predictions are dependent on the ground truth classiﬁcation of
a given dataset. Moreover, both the metrics take into account the True Negative (TN) values in the binary case, so they
may be preferable to F1-Score when the aim is to assessing the performance of a binary classiﬁer.
5.1 Mattheus Correlation Coefﬁcient
Brian W. Mattheus developed the Mattheus Correlation Coefﬁcient (MCC) in 1975, exploiting Karl Pearson’s Phi-
Coefﬁcient in order to compare different chemical structures. Only in the 2000s MCC became a widely employed
metric to test the performance of Machine Learning techniques with some extensions to the multi-class case [4].
MCC has a range of [ 1;1]. Values close to 1 indicate very good prediction, in fact there is a strong positive correlation
between the Prediction and the True Labels. Strong correlation implies that the two variables strongly agree, therefore
the predicted values will be very similar to the Actual Classiﬁcation. On the contrary, when MCC is equal to 0, there is
no correlation between our variables: the classiﬁer is randomly assigning the units to the classes without any link to
their true class value. [1].
MCC may also be negative, in this case the relation between true and predicted classes is of an inverse type. Even if
this is an highly undesirable situation, this often happens because of setting errors in the modelling: strong inverse
correlation means that the model learnt how to classify the data but it systematically switches all the labels. But it is
also possible to solve the problem by ﬁxing the implementation errors.
5.1.1 Mattheus Correlation Coefﬁcient for binary classiﬁcation
MCC could be seen as the Phi-Coefﬁcient applied to binary classiﬁcation problems: as described above, we consider the
"Predicted" classiﬁcation and "Actual" classiﬁcation as two discrete random variables and we evaluate their association.
Figure 7: Predicted and Actual Random Variables
10
Metrics for Multi-Class Classiﬁcation: an Overview A W HITE PAPER
MCC =TPTN FPFNp
(TP+FN)(TP+FP)(TN+FN)(TN+FP)(24)
In Formula 24, we notice that MCC takes into account all the confusion matrix cells. In particular, the numerator
consists of two products including all the four inner cells of the confusion matrix in Figure 7, while the denominator
consists of the four outer cells (row totals and column totals).
A practical demonstration of the concept that there is an effective support regarding the equivalence of MCC and
Phi-coefﬁcient in the binary case is given by [8].
5.1.2 Mattheus Correlation Coefﬁcient for Multi-class Classiﬁcation
Some changes happen when it comes to multi-class classiﬁcation: the True and the Predicted class distributions are no
longer binary and a higher number of classes has been taken into account. In this case numerator and denominator take
a different shape compared to the binary case and this can partially help to ﬁnd more stable results inside the range [-1;
+1] of MCC.
In the multi-class case, the Matthews correlation coefﬁcient can be deﬁned in terms of a confusion matrix CforK
classes.
Figure 8: Multi-class Confusion Matrix C
MCC =cs PK
kpktkq
(s2 PK
kp2
k)(s2 PK
kt2
k)(25)
To simplify the deﬁnition, it is necessary to consider the following intermediate variables [6]:
c=PK
kCkkthe total number of elements correctly predicted
s=PK
iPK
jCijthe total number of elements
pk=PK
iCkithe number of times that class kwas predicted (column total)
tk=PK
iCikthe number of times that class ktruly occurred (row total)
The setting of this formula has raised some intuitions.
In the multi-class case MCC seems to depend on correctly classiﬁed elements, because the total number of elements
correctly predicted are multiplied by the total number of elements at the numerator and the weight of this product is
more powerful than the sumPK
kpktk. This sum includes also the elements wrongly classiﬁed by the model and
covers multiplicative entities that are weaker than the product cs.
Regarding the denominator, it is employed to rescale the fraction in the interval [ 1;+1], in fact it corresponds to
the maximum absolute value the numerator may assume. The ﬁrst term in the denominator entirely depends on the
11
Metrics for Multi-Class Classiﬁcation: an Overview A W HITE PAPER
Predicted classiﬁcation, whereas the second one depends on the True classes, which can be considered as property of
the dataset since they do not change when we apply different models on the same dataset.
The weakness of MCC involves its lower limits. There is no ﬁxed minimum value and it changes every time between -1
and 0 depending on the number and on the Actual distribution of the classes in the initial dataset [6].
5.1.3 Pros and Cons of MCC
Among the Advantages of this technique, we can see that MCC includes all the entries of the confusion matrix both at
the numerator and the denominator. This means that MCC is generally regarded as a balanced measure which can be
used in binary classiﬁcation even if the classes are very different in size [4].
Moreover, MCC is a good indicator of total unbalanced prediction models. We have shown this topic in Figure 9, where
the model assigns all the elements to only one class and the value of MCC falls to 0, even if the Accuracy achieves a
great value (0.80) and the Recall for the ﬁrst class assumes the highest value (1).
Figure 9: Total Unbalanced Prediction
However, the weaknesses of MCC could be found in some extreme cases and they are mainly related to its construction.
If there are unbalanced results in the model’s prediction, the ﬁnal value of MCC shows very wide ﬂuctuations inside its
range of [-1; +1] during the training period of the model [3].
5.2 Cohen’s Kappa
Cohen’s Kappa builds on the idea of measuring the concordance between the Predicted and the True Labels, which
are regarded as two random categorical variables [10]. It is possible to compare two categorical variables building the
confusion matrix and calculating the marginal rows and the marginal columns distributions.
Figure 10: Confusion matrix for two General Categorical Distributions
In particular two distributions of the same character are independent if they assume the same relative frequencies at the
same character model.
nvh
nTh=nvT
N(26)
12
Metrics for Multi-Class Classiﬁcation: an Overview A W HITE PAPER
Also, two characters (i.e. model’s Prediction & Actual classiﬁcation) are independent variables in distribution if this
relationship is true:
nvh=nThnvT
N(27)
Andnvhstands for a relative frequency that we expect to ﬁnd if two categorical distributions are independent.
Given this deﬁnition of independence between categorical variables, we can start dealing with Cohen’s Kappa indicators
as rating values of the dependence (or independence) between the model’s Prediction and the Actual classiﬁcation.
The marginal columns distribution can be regarded as the distribution of the Predicted values (how many elements are
predicted in each possible class), while the Marginal rows represent the distribution of the True classes.
Moreover, we will see in this chapter why Cohen’s Kappa could be also useful in evaluating the performance of two
different models when they are applied on two different databases and it allows to make a comparison between them.
5.2.1 Cohen’s Kappa for binary classiﬁcation
Starting from a simple confusion matrix:
Figure 11: Confusion Matrix for binary Cohen’s Kappa
Cohen (1960) evaluated the classiﬁcation of two raters (i.e. model’s Prediction & Actual distribution) in order to ﬁnd a
measure of agreement between them, or rather, he looked for a statistic giving the degree of concordance between two
(or more) sets of measurements. He calculated the inter-observer agreement taking into account the expected agreement
by chance as follows [10]:
K=Po Pe
1 Pe(28)
Where
Pois the proportion of observed agreement, in other words it is the Accuracy achieved by the model
Peis the Expected Accuracy, i.e. the level of Accuracy we expect to obtain by chance. If we have a model that
classiﬁes the units in random classes, preserving just the distribution of the predicted classes, its Accuracy
should be close to Pe
1 Peis essentially the difference between the maximum value and the minimum value of the numerator, in
this way we are re-scaling the ﬁnal index between -1 and +1.
Pe=PPositive +PNegative (29)
PPositive =TP+FN
NTP+FP
N(30)
13
Metrics for Multi-Class Classiﬁcation: an Overview A W HITE PAPER
PNegative =TN+FP
NTN+FN
N(31)
The K statistic can take values from  1to+1and is interpreted somewhat arbitrarily as follows: 0 is the agreement
equivalent to chance, from 0.10 to 0.20 is a slight agreement, from 0.21 to 0.40 is a fair agreement, from 0.41 to 0.60 is
a moderate agreement, from 0.61 to 0.80 is a substantial agreement, from 0.81 to 0.99 is a near perfect agreement and
1.00 is a perfect agreement. Negative values indicate that the observed agreement is worse than what would be expected
by chance. An alternative interpretation is offered by [10] saying that kappa values below 0.60 indicate a signiﬁcant
level of disagreement.
Insights
Given the similarity of the last operations to the concept of independence between two events,
PPositive =P(Prediction 1\Actual 1) (32)
PPositive =P(Prediction 1)P(Actual 1) (33)
PPositive =45 + 15
10045 + 25
100= 0:42 (34)
we have noticed that the Expected Accuracy Peplays the main role in the Cohen’s Kappa Score because it brings with
it two components of independence ( PPositive andPNegatives ) which are subtracted from the observed agreement Po.
It is important to remove the Expected Accuracy (the random agreement component for Cohen and the two independent
components for us) from the Accuracy for two reasons: the Expected Accuracy is related to a classiﬁer that assigns
units to classes completely at random, it is important to ﬁnd a model’s Prediction that is as dependent as possible to the
Actual distribution. So Cohen’s Kappa results to be a measure of how much the model’s prediction is dependent on the
Actual distribution, with the aim to identify the best learning algorithm of classiﬁcation.
These are the basic intuitions on Cohen’s Kappa score and they have to be supported by demonstrations:
Pe=PPositive +PNegative (35)
Pe=TP+FN
NTP+FP
N+TN+FP
NTN+FN
N(36)
if nvh=nThnvT
Nthen TP=(45 + 15)(45 + 25)
100(37)
and P Positive =TP1
100and P Negative =TN1
100(38)
Coming back to the formula 35:
Pe=PPositive +PNegative =TP
100+TN
100=TP+TN
100(39)
14
Metrics for Multi-Class Classiﬁcation: an Overview A W HITE PAPER
If two random and categorical variables are independent they should have this AccuracyTP+TN
100. But, since we want
that the Predicted and Actual distribution to be as dependent as possible, Cohen’s Kappa score directly subtracts this
previous Accuracy from the observed agreement at the numerator of the formula. In this way, we have obtained an
Accuracy value related only to the goodness of the model and we have already deleted the part ascribed to chance (the
Expected Accuracy).
Just as a reminder, two dependent variables are also correlated and identiﬁed by reciprocal agreement. In our case a
high correlation is observed when the model’s Prediction assigns a unit to one class, and the same unit has been also
assigned to the same class by the Actual classiﬁcation.
5.2.2 Cohen’s Kappa for multi-class cases
In the multi-class case, the calculation of Cohen’s Kappa Score changes its structure and it becomes more similar to
Mattheus Correlation Coefﬁcient [13].
Referring to Multi-class Confusion Matrix Cin Figure 8:
K=cs PK
kpktk
s2 PK
kpktk(40)
Where:
c=PK
kCkkthe total number of elements correctly predicted
s=PK
iPK
jCijthe total number of elements
pk=PK
iCkithe number of times that class kwas predicted (column total)
tk=PK
iCikthe number of times that class ktruly occurs (row total)
MCC and Cohen’s Kappa coincides in the multi-class cases apart from the denominator that is slightly lower in Cohen’s
Kappa score justifying slightly higher ﬁnal scores. However some evidences of the binary case still holds: when Kis
equal to 0 the model’s Prediction is totally independent from the Actual classiﬁcation and if Kis equal to 1 the model’s
Prediction is totally dependent from the Actual classiﬁcation. Instead Kis negative when the agreement between the
algorithm and the true labels distribution is worse than the random agreement, so that there is no accordance between
the model’s Prediction and the Actual classiﬁcation.
As before, the advantage of Cohen’s Kappa score must be sought through the measure of Expected Accuracy as an
intrinsic characteristic of a given dataset. In the multi-class case the Expected Accuracy assumes the shape of the sum
applied on the row and column totals multiplication for each class k(40).
5.2.3 Useful Applications
Cohen’s Kappa ﬁnds useful applications in many classiﬁcation problems.
Firstly it allows the joint comparison of two models for which it has registered the same accuracy, but different values
of Cohen’s Kappa. Figure 12 is a simpliﬁed binary example, where Kincreases more the errors are unbalanced towards
one class. This is true also for multi-class settings.
Figure 12: Cohen’s Kappa Matrix for comparison
Secondly, the Expected Accuracy re-scales the score and represents the intrinsic characteristics of a given dataset.
We consider both the number of classes and the fact to be balanced or unbalanced towards a group of classes as the two
15
Metrics for Multi-Class Classiﬁcation: an Overview A W HITE PAPER
main representative characteristics of a dataset. Subtracting the Expected Accuracy we are also removing the intrinsic
dissimilarities of different datasets and we are making two different classiﬁcation problems comparable. As a result, K
can compare the performances of two different model on two different cases.
6 Conclusions
The aim of this essay is an in-depth analysis of different choices to evaluate the performance of different classiﬁcation
algorithms on multi-class datasets.
As the most famous classiﬁcation performance indicator, the Accuracy returns an overall measure of how much the
model is correctly predicting the classiﬁcation of a single individual above the entire set of data. It is an average measure
which is suitable for balanced datasets because it does not consider the class distribution.
As a simple arithmetic mean of Recalls, the Balanced Accuracy gives the same weight to each class and its insensibility
to class distribution helps to spot possible predictive problems also for rare and under-represented classes.
As weighted average of Recall, the Balanced Accuracy Weighted keeps track of the importance of each class thanks
to the frequency. In this case, large and small classes have a proportional effect on the result in relation to their size and
the metric can be applied during the training phase of the algorithm on a wide number of classes.
As harmonic mean of Macro Precision and Macro Recall, Macro-Average methods tend to calculate an overall mean of
different measures without taking into account the class size. The effect of the biggest classes is shifted by the smallest
ones which have the same weight.
Regarding Micro F1-Score , it is possible to show that the harmonic mean of Micro Precision and Micro Recall just
boils to the Accuracy formula, giving a new interpretation of it.
As average of Cross Entropy for each unit in a dataset, it is a measure of agreement between two probability
distributions (predicted and true classiﬁcation). Cross Entropy is detached from the confusion matrix and it is widely
employed thanks to his fast calculation. Although it just takes into account the prediction probability of the right class,
without considering how the probability distribution behaves on the other classes, this may cause issues especially when
a unit is misclassiﬁed.
It may be considered as the successor of Karl Pearson’s Phi-Coefﬁcient, the Mattheus Correlation Coefﬁcient
expresses the degree of correlation between two categorical random variables (predicted and true classiﬁcation). Its
result covers the range [-1; +1] pointing out different model behaviors during the training phase of the algorithm.
Its value represents the dependence between the predicted and the true classiﬁcation, Cohen’s Kappa exploits the
Expected Accuracy, namely a measure representing the dependence obtained by chance between the predicted and the
true classiﬁcation measure, to delete any intrinsic characteristic of the dataset. This allows for the comparison between
different models applied on different samples of data.
Funding
We acknowledge ﬁnancial support by CRIF S.p.A. and Università degli Studi di Bologna.
References
[1] Sabri Boughorbel, Fethi Jarray, and Mohammed El-Anbari. “Optimal classiﬁer for imbalanced data using
Matthews Correlation Coefﬁcient metric”. In: PLOS ONE 12.6 (June 2017), pp. 1–17. DOI:10.1371/journal.
pone.0177678 .URL:https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0177678 .
[2] K. H. Brodersen et al. “The Balanced Accuracy and Its Posterior Distribution”. In: 2010 20th International
Conference on Pattern Recognition . 2010, pp. 3121–3124.
[3] J. B. Brown. “Classiﬁers and their Metrics Quantiﬁed”. In: Molecular Informatics 37.1-2 (2018), p. 1700127.
DOI:10.1002/minf.201700127 . eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/minf.
201700127 .URL:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/minf.201700127 .
[4] Davide Chicco and Giuseppe Jurman. “The advantages of the Matthews correlation coefﬁcient (MCC) over F1
score and accuracy in binary classiﬁcation evaluation”. eng. In: BMC genomics 21.1 (Jan. 2020), pp. 6–6. ISSN :
1471-2164. DOI:10.1186/s12864-019-6413-7 .URL:https://doi.org/10.1186/s12864-019-6413-
7.
16
Metrics for Multi-Class Classiﬁcation: an Overview A W HITE PAPER
[5] S.C. CHOI. “DISCRIMINATION AND CLASSIFICATION: OVERVIEW”. In: Statistical Methods of Discrimi-
nation and Classiﬁcation . Ed. by SUNG C. CHOI. Pergamon, 1986, pp. 173–177. ISBN : 978-0-08-034000-5.
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-034000-5.50005-8 .URL:http://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/B9780080340005500058 .
[6] J. Gorodkin. “Comparing two K-category assignments by a K-category correlation coefﬁcient”. In: Computational
Biology and Chemistry 28.5 (2004), pp. 367–374. ISSN : 1476-9271. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
compbiolchem . 2004 . 09 . 006 .URL:http : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S1476927104000799 .
[7] B.W. Matthews. “Comparison of the predicted and observed secondary structure of T4 phage lysozyme”. In:
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Protein Structure 405.2 (1975), pp. 442–451. ISSN : 0005-2795. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/0005- 2795(75)90109- 9 .URL:http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/0005279575901099 .
[8] Nechushtan Moran. Ok I got it. . . Mar. 2020. URL:https://medium.com/@morannechushtan/ok-i-got-
it-9445e36d6c95 .
[9] Juri Opitz and Sebastian Burst. Macro F1 and Macro F1 . 2019. arXiv: 1911.03347 [cs.LG] .
[10] Priya Ranganathan, C. S. Pramesh, and Rakesh Aggarwal. “Common pitfalls in statistical analysis: Measures of
agreement”. eng. In: Perspectives in clinical research 8.4 (2017). PCR-8-187[PII], pp. 187–191. ISSN : 2229-3485.
DOI:10.4103/picr.PICR_123_17 .URL:https://doi.org/10.4103/picr.PICR_123_17 .
[11] Yutaka Sasaki et al. The truth of the f-measure. 2007 . 2007.
[12] Boaz Shmueli. Multi-Class Metrics Made Simple, Part II: the F1-score . July 2019. URL:https : / /
towardsdatascience . com / multi - class - metrics - made - simple - part - ii - the - f1 - score -
ebe8b2c2ca1 .
[13] Antonio J. Tallón-Ballesteros and José Riquelme. “Data Mining Methods Applied to a Digital Forensics Task for
Supervised Machine Learning”. In: Studies in Computational Intelligence 555 (Jan. 2014), pp. 413–428. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-319-05885-6-17 .
17
